Chapter 1. Compiler Informational Messages (1000-1076, 2800-2999)

IBM1018I I option-name should be specified within OPTIONS, but is accepted
as is.

This message is used in building the options listing.

IBM1035I I The next statement was merged with this statement.

The statement following the statement for which this message was issued
were merged with that statement.

IBM1036I I The next statement-count statements were merged with this
statement.

The specified number of statements following the statement for which
this message was issued were merged with that statement.

A comment ends on a different line than it begins.  This may indicate
that an end-of-comment delimiter is missing.

IBM1042I I String spans line-count lines.

A string ends on a different line than it begins. This may indicate that
a closing quote is missing.

IBM1043I I variable name is contextually declared as attribute.

There is no declare statement for the named variable, but it has been
given the indicated attribute because of its usage. For instance, if
the variable is used as a locator, it will be given the POINTER attribute.

IBM1044I I FIXED BINARY with precision 7 or less is mapped to 1 byte.

IBM1038I I note

The OS/370 PL/I and PL/I for MVS compilers would have mapped this to
2 bytes.

This message is used to report back end informational messages.

IBM1046I I UNSPEC applied to an array is handled as a scalar reference.

IBM1039I I Variable variable name is implicitly declared.

All variables should be declared except for contextual declarations of
built-in functions, SYSPRINT and SYSIN.

The OS/370 PL/I and PL/I for MVS compilers would have handled UNSPEC
applied to an array as an array of scalars.

IBM1047I I ORDER option may inhibit optimization.

IBM1040I I note

This message is used by %NOTE statements with a return code of 0.

IBM1041I I Comment spans line-count lines.

If the ORDER option applies to a block, optimization is likely to be
inhibited, especially if the block contains ON-units that refer to
variables declared outside the ON-unit.

IBM1048I I GET/PUT DATA without a data-list inhibits optimization.

A GET DATA statement can alter almost any variable, and a PUT DATA
statement requires almost all variables to be stored home anytime a PUT
DATA statement might be executed. Both of these requirements inhibit
optimization.

IBM1050I I INITIAL attribute for RESERVED STATIC is ignored.

The INITIAL attribute has been specified for a variable with the
attributes RESERVED STATIC. Unless such a variable is listed in
the EXPORTS clause of a PACKAGE statement, the variable will not be
initialized.

IBM1051I I Argument to BUILTIN name built-in function may not be byte
aligned.

This message applies to the ADDR, CURRENTSTORAGE/SIZE and STORAGE/SIZE
built-in functions. Applying any one of these built-in functions to an
unaligned bit variable may not produce the results you expected.

IBM1052I I The NODESCRIPTOR attribute is accepted even though some
arguments have * extents.

When a string with * extent or an array with * extents is passed, PL/I
normally passes a descriptor so that the called routine knows how big
the passed argument really is. The NODESCRIPTOR attribute indicates that
no descriptor should be passed; this is invalid if the called routine
is a PL/I procedure.

This message can be used to help find code that may be very expensive
if executed as part of a loop or to find code involving conversions of
unlike types.

IBM1059I I SELECT statement contains no OTHERWISE clause.

The ERROR condition will be raised if no WHEN clause is satisfied.

IBM1060I I Name resolution for identifier selected its declaration in
a structure, rather than its non- member declaration in a parent block.

The PL/I language rules require this, but it might be a little
surprising. In the following code fragment, for instance, the display
statement would display the value of x.y.

    a: proc;

      dcl y fixed bin init(3);

      call b;

      b: proc;

        dcl
          1 x,
            2 y fixed bin init(5), 2 z fixed bin init(7);

        display( y );

      end;

    end a;

    dcl x entry( char(*), fixed bin(31) )
          options( nodescriptor );

IBM1061I I Probable DATE calculation should be examined for validity
after the year 1999.

IBM1053I I Scaled FIXED operation evaluated as FIXED DECIMAL.

If one of the built-in functions ADD, DIVIDE, MULTIPLY or SUBTRACT is
invoked with argument that have type FIXED, if either operand has a
non-zero scale factor, the result will have type FIXED DEC.

IBM1058I I Conversion from source type to target type will be done by
library call.

Use of any of the constants 365, 1900 or '19' may indicate a date
calculation. If this is true, you should examine the calculation to
determine if it will be valid after the year 1999.

IBM1062I I variable inferred to contain a two- digit year.

The indicated was inferred to contain a two-digit year because, for
example, it was assigned the DATE built- in function.

IBM1064I I Use of OPT(2) forces TEST(BLOCK).

The AUTOMATIC variables in a block may be used in the declare statements
and the executable statements of any contained block, but in the block
in which they are declared, they should be used only in the executable
statements.

Under OPT(2), any specification of TEST hooks stronger than TEST(BLOCK)
is not supported.

IBM1065I I FLOAT constant constant would be more precise if specified
as a long FLOAT.

The named short floating-point constant cannot be exactly represented. It
could be more accurately represented if it were specified as a long
floating- point constant. For example, the 1.3E0 cannot be exactly
represented, but could be better represented as 1.3D0.

IBM1067I I UNTIL clause ignored.

If a DO specification has no clause such as TO, BY or REPEAT that could
cause the loop to be repeated, then the UNTIL clause will have no effect
on the loop and will be ignored.

    do x = y until ( z > 0 );
      ...
    end;

IBM1068I I PROCEDURE has no RETURNS attribute, but contains a RETURN
statement. A RETURNS attribute will be assumed.

If a procedure contains a RETURN statement, it should have the RETURNS
attribute specified on its PROCEDURE statement.

    a: proc;
      return( 0 );
    end;

IBM1069I I The AUTOMATIC variables in a block should not be used in the
prologue of that block.

    dcl x fixed bin(15) init(5); dcl y(x) fixed bin(15);

IBM2800I I The PROCEDURE proc name is not referenced.

The named procedure is not external and is never referenced in the
compilation unit. This may represent an error (if it was supposed to be
called) or an opportunity to eliminate some dead code.

IBM2801I I FIXED DEC(source- precision,source-scale) operand will be
converted to FIXED BIN(target-precision,target-scale).  This introduces
a non-zero scale factor into an integer operation and will produce a
result with the attributes FIXED BIN(result- precision,result-scale).

Under RULES(IBM), when an arithmetic operation has an operand that is
FIXED BIN and an operand that is FIXED DEC with a non-zero scale factor,
then the FIXED DEC operand will be converted to FIXED BIN.

IBM2802I I Aggregate mapping will be done by library call.

This message can be used to help find code that may be very expensive if
executed as part of a loop. It may be produced, for example, if your code
refers to an element of a structure that uses REFER. If the structure
uses multiple REFERs and the element occurs after the last REFER, the
single reference to that element may produce multiple copies of this
message (because multiple library calls will be made).

IBM2803I I keyword STRING EDIT statement optimized.

This message is issued when a PUT or GET STRING EDIT statement has been
optimized by the compiler so that most of it is done inline.

In certain conversions of FIXED BIN(p,q) to FIXED DEC, the old compiler
slightly rounded the result if q was positive.

IBM2805I I For assignment to variable name, conversion from source type
to target type will be done by library call.

IBM2812I I Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built-
in function would lead to much better code if declared with the VALUE
attribute.

This message can be used to help find code that may be very expensive
if executed as part of a loop or to find code involving conversions of
unlike types.

IBM2806I I Passing a LABEL to another routine is poor coding practice
and will cause the compiler to generate less than optimal code.

For functions such as VERIFY(x,y), if y is a constant, it is much better
for performance to declare y with the VALUE attribute rather than with
the INITIAL attribute.

IBM2814I I Aggregate mapping for storage allocation will be done by
library call.

It is generally very unwise to pass a label to another routine. It would
be good to think about redesigning any code doing this.

IBM2809I I FIXED DEC(source- precision,source-scale) operand will be
converted to FIXED BIN(target-precision,target-scale).  This introduces
8-byte integer arithmetic into an operation that might be faster if
computed in decimal.

This message can be used to help find code that may be expensive if
invoked many times. This message may be produced for ALLOCATE statements
for BASED and CONTROLLED variables with non-constant extents, and it
may also be produced for the prologue of PROCEDUREs that use AUTOMATIC
variables with non-constant extents.

IBM2815I I Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY
name is not recommended to be passed BYVALUE.

If the LIMITS option specifies a maximum FIXED precision greater than 31,
then an operation involving a FIXED DEC and a FIXED BIN operand might
produce an 8-byte integer result even if both operands are "small". For
example, if you add a FIXED DEC(13) and a FIXED BIN(31), the result
would be an 8-byte integer (because a FIXED DEC(13) value might be too
large to fit in a 4-byte integer). To avoid this, you could apply the
DECIMAL built-in function to the FIXED BIN operand.

A BYVALUE argument should be one that could reasonably be passed in a
register. Hence its type should be either one of REAL FIXED BIN, REAL
FLOAT, POINTER, OFFSET, HANDLE, LIMITED ENTRY, FILE, ORDINAL, CHAR(1),
WCHAR(1), or ALIGNED BIT(n) with n less than or equal to 8.

IBM2816I I BYVALUE parameters should ideally be ones that can reasonably
be passed in registers.

IBM2810I I Conversion of FIXED BIN(source- precision,source-scale) to
FIXED DEC(target-precision,target-scale) may produce a more accurate
result than under the old compiler.

A BYVALUE parameter should be one that could reasonably be passed in a
register. Hence its type should be either one of REAL FIXED BIN, REAL
FLOAT, POINTER, OFFSET, HANDLE, LIMITED ENTRY, FILE, ORDINAL, CHAR(1),
WCHAR(1), or ALIGNED BIT(n) with n less than or equal to 8.

IBM2817I I BYVALUE in RETURNS is recommended only for types that can
reasonably be returned in registers.

This message can be used to help find code that may be very expensive
if executed as part of a loop or to find code involving conversions of
unlike types.

IBM2826I I Using BYVALUE in RETURNS is recommended only if the value to be
returned has a type that could reasonably be returned in a register. Hence
its type should be either one of REAL FIXED BIN, REAL FLOAT, POINTER,
OFFSET, HANDLE, LIMITED ENTRY, FILE, ORDINAL, CHAR(1), WCHAR(1), or
ALIGNED BIT(n) with n less than or equal to 8.

IBM2818I I Addition or subtraction of FIXED DEC(precision,scale-factor)
and FIXED DEC(precision,scale-factor) may raise FIXEDOVERFLOW.

For assignment to variable name, conversion from source type to target
type will be done by library call.

This message can be used to help find code that may be very expensive
if executed as part of a loop or to find code involving conversions of
unlike types.

IBM2827I I Conversion from source type to target type can produce an
inexact or incorrect result.

The precision required to hold the result as defined by PL/I of this
add (or subtract) is greater than the LIMITS(FIXEDDEC) maximum for the
operands and hence depending on the data values, FIXEDOVERFLOW may be
raised by the operation.

IBM2819I I Multiplication of FIXED DEC(precision,scale-factor) and FIXED
DEC(precision,scale-factor) may raise FIXEDOVERFLOW.

The precision required to hold the result as defined by PL/I of this
multiply is greater than the LIMITS(FIXEDDEC) maximum for the operands
and hence depending on the data values, FIXEDOVERFLOW may be raised by
the operation.

IBM2820I I The option-name option is not supported on this platform.

The named compiler option is not supported on this platform. For example,
the BLKOFF option is an option on the z/OS platform, but not on AIX or
Windows. If specified on those platforms, it is ignored.

IBM2825I I Conversion from source type to target type will be done by
library call.

For example, the conversion of the FLOAT DEC(15) value 321.1234 to FIXED
DEC(15,15) will produce the inexact result 0.123399999999952. However,
the conversion of the FLOAT DEC(15) value 54321.1234 to FIXED DEC(15,15)
will produce the incorrect result 0.372036854775807. Incorrect results
can be avoided in a conversion to FIXED DEC(p,q) if the absolute value
of the source is less than 10**(18-p).

IBM2830I I VALUE(: type name :) will return an instance of the structure
type that is only partially initialized.

If the VALUE type function is applied to a structure type which has
an initial attribute on only some of its elements, then the structure
instance will be only partially initialized. For example, the compiler
will flag the following code with this message because B2 has no initial
value - it will have the initial values from type a only if B2 is also
declared with the attribute init( value(: a :) ).

     if ( a < b ) = true then

      define structure
        1 a,
          2 a1 fixed bin(31) init( 17 ), 2 a2 fixed bin(31) init( 19 );

      define structure
        1 b,
          2 b1 fixed bin(31) init( 119 ), 2 b2 type a;

      dcl x type b;

      x = value(: b :);

IBM2831I I ASSERT statement may never be executed.

This message warns that the compiler has detected an ASSERT UNREACHABLE
statement that can never be run as the flow of control must always pass
it by.

IBM2832I I INLINE directive will be ignored for procedure name and all
other PROCEDUREs since the TEST option is on.

The compiler will not inline a PROCEDURE that which has any labels that
are possibly the target of a GOTO from another PROCEDURE or BEGIN block.

IBM2837I I INLINE directive will be ignored for procedure name since it
contains some DATA-directed I/O statements.

The compiler will not inline a PROCEDURE that has any PUT DATA or GET
DATA statements.

IBM2838I I INLINE directive will be ignored for procedure name since it
has non-default condition enablement.

The compiler will perform no inling if the TEST option is on.

IBM2833I I INLINE directive will be ignored for procedure name since it
contains ENTRY statements.

The compiler will not inline a PROCEDURE that has any condition enablement
that differs from the default.

IBM2839I I INLINE directive will be ignored for procedure name since it
contains ON-units.

The compiler will not inline a PROCEDURE that has ENTRY statements.

IBM2834I I INLINE directive will be ignored for procedure name since it
contains nested PROCEDUREs and/or BEGIN blocks.

IBM2840I I The compiler will not inline a PROCEDURE that has any ON
statements.

If TRANSLATE is being used to reformat a date-time value, it would be
better to use the REPATTERN or DATETIME built-in function instead.

The compiler will not inline a PROCEDURE or BEGIN block that contains
other PROCEDUREs or BEGIN blocks.

IBM2835I I INLINE directive will be ignored for procedure name since
it has OPTIONS(NODESCRIPTOR), but has some parameters with nonconstant
extents.

The compiler will not inline a PROCEDURE that requires has the
NODESCRIPTOR option but would normally be passed descriptors with its
arguments.

IBM2836I I INLINE directive will be ignored for procedure name since it
contains labels that may be targets of out-of-block GOTOs.

If the first and third arguments to the TRANSLATE built-in function are
both constant, then the code is likely trying to reformat a date-time
value. This code would be easier to understand if the REPATTERN built-in
function or, if possible, the DATETIME built- in function were used
instead. For example, the first two bits of code below assign the same
value to the target variable shortdate, and the second two bits of code
also assign the same value to the target variable currentdate. However,
in each case, the second statement is much clearer.

     shortdate
       = translate( '12.34.5678',
                    longdate, '56783412abcdefghijkl' );

     shortdate

      = repattern( longdate,
                   'DD.MM.YYYY', 'YYYYMMDDHHMISS999' );

     currentdate
       = translate( '12.34.5678',
                    datetime(), '56783412abcdefghijkl' );

The compiler issues this message if a compilation unit contains a PACKAGE
statement with exactly one level-1 procedure which in turn has its own
nested procedures.

     currentdate
      = datetime( 'DD.MM.YYYY' );

IBM2847I I IBM2841I I

Changing MEMCONVERT(p,n,1200,q,m,1208 ) to MEMCU12(p,n,q,m) would be
better for performance.

Source in RETURN statement has a MAXLENGTH of return- length which is
greater than the length of returns-length in the corresponding RETURNS
attribute.

MEMCU12 will perform much better than MEMCONVERT.

IBM2842I I Changing MEMCONVERT(p,n,1208,q,m,1200 ) to MEMCU21(p,n,q,m)
would be better for performance.

If a RETURNS statement specifies a VARYING or VARYINGZ variable with a
MAXLENGTH greater than the length specified in the RETURNS attribute,
then it may have a value that is too big to be returned without
truncation. For example, the variable X in the RETURNS statement below
has a value ('TooBig') that has length greater than 4. It will be trimmed
(to 'TooB') to fit the RETURNS attribute.

MEMCU21 will perform much better than MEMCONVERT.

    x: proc returns( char(4) );
       dcl x char(8) var; x = 'TooBig'; return( x );

IBM2844I I The characters characters will be accepted as two separate
characters. It would be better to separate these characters with a blank.

IBM2848I I ADD of FIXED DEC(x-precision,x- scale) and FIXED DEC(y-
precision,y-scale) with a result precision and scale of (result-
precision,result-scale) might overflow.

This may represent a problem especially if this occurs in an assignment
statement and += was meant instead of =+.

IBM2845I I The characters characters will be accepted as two separate
characters. It would be better to separate these characters with a blank.

This may represent a problem especially if this occurs in an assignment
statement and -= was meant instead of =-.

IBM2846I I It would be better to convert nested PROCEDUREs in a PACKAGE
into sister nonnested PROCEDUREs.

In ADD(x,y,p,q), if the precisions of x and y are large enough compared
to p (and q), then overflow or size might be raised.

IBM2851I I CEIL will be evaluated by computing the integral quotient and
if the quotient is nonnegative, rounding it up by one if the remainder
is non-zero.

Note that this will occur even if the quotient would have the attributes
FIXED BIN(p,0) in which case no rounding would be possible. For example,
if x is FIXED BIN(31), then (x/2) would have the attributes FIXED
BIN(31). If x equals 7, then ( x / 2 ) would have the value 3, and i x
equals -7, then ( x / 2 ) would have the value -3. However, if x is 7,
CEIL( x / 2 ) will yield 4, and if x is -7, CEIL( x / 2 ) will yield -3,

appropriate pattern were used instead, and it might also be less
problematic. For example, the first pair of statements below assign
the same value to the target variable thedate, and the second pair
of statements also assign the same value to the target variable
currentdate. However, in each case, the second statement is much
clearer. Moreover, in the second pair, the first assignment could
produce an erroneous value if the datetime invocations were not all on
the same day.

     thedate = substr( datetime(), 1, 8 );

     thedate = datetime( 'YYYYMMDD' );

     current
       = substr( datetime(), 7, 2 )
         || '.' || substr( datetime(), 5, 2 ) || '.' || substr(
         datetime(), 1, 4 );

     currentdate = datetime( 'DD.MM.YYYY' );

IBM2852I I FLOOR will be evaluated by computing the integral quotient
and if the quotient is not positive, rounding it down by one if the
remainder is non-zero.

Note that this will occur even if the quotient would have the attributes
FIXED BIN(p,0) in which case no rounding would be possible. For example,
if x is FIXED BIN(31), then (x/2) would have the attributes FIXED
BIN(31). If x equals 7, then ( x / 2 ) would have the value 3, and i x
equals -7, then ( x / 2 ) would have the value -3. However, if x is 7,
FLOOR( x / 2 ) will yield 3, and if x is -7, FLOOR( x / 2 ) will yield -4.

IBM2853I I If bifname is being used to reformat a date-time value,
it would be better to use the DATETIME built-in function with the
appropriate pattern instead.

The use of SUBSTR, LEFT, and RIGHT would be easier to understand if the
the DATETIME with the

Chapter 2. Compiler Warning Messages (1078-1225, 2600-2799)

IBM1078I W Statement may never be executed.

IBM1082I W This message warns that the compiler has detected a statement
that can never be run as the flow of control must always pass it by.

Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference entry name is a
scalar, but its declare specifies a structure.

IBM1079I W Too few arguments have been specified for the ENTRY ENTRY name.

A scalar may be passed as the argument when a structure is expected,
but this require building a "dummy" structure and assigning the scalar
to each field in that structure.

The number of arguments should match the number of parameters in the
ENTRY declaration.

   dcl e entry( 1 2 fixed bin(31), 2 fixed bin(31) ); dcl i fixed bin(15);
   call e( i );

IBM1080I W The keyword label-name, which could form a complete statement,
is accepted as a label name, but a colon may have been used where a
semicolon was meant.

IBM1083I W A PL/I keyword which could form a complete statement has been
used as statement label. This usage is accepted, but a colon may have
been used where a semicolon was intended.

     dcl a fixed bin(31) ext;

     if a = 0 then
       put skip list( 'a = 0' )
     else:

     a = a + 1;

IBM1081I W keyword expression should be scalar. Lower bounds assumed
for any missing subscripts.

The expression in the named keyword clause should be a scalar, but an
array reference was specified.

   dcl p     pointer; dcl x     based char(10); dcl a(10) area(1000);

   allocate x in(a) set(p);

Source in label assignment is inside a DO-loop, and an illegal jump into
the loop may be attempted. Optimization will also be very inhibited.

GOTO statements may not jump into DO loops, and the compiler will
flag any GOTO whose target is a label constant inside a (different)
DO loop. However, if a label inside a DO loop is assigned to a label
variable, then this kind of error may go undetected.

IBM1084I W Nonblanks after right margin are not allowed under
RULES(NOLAXMARGINS).

Under RULES(NOLAXMARGINS), there should be nothing but blanks after the
right margin.

IBM1085I W variable may be unset when used.

The indicated variable may not have been assigned or initialized a value
before it is used.

IBM1086I W built-in function will be evaluated using long rather than
extended routines.

9

The indicated built-in function has an extended float argument, but
since the corresponding extended routine is not yet available, it will
be evaluated using the appropriate long routine.

IBM1087I W FLOAT source is too big for its target. An appropriate HUGE
value of assumed value is assumed.

A value larger than HUGE(1s0) cannot be assigned to a short float. Under
hexadecimal float, the value 3.141592E+40 could be assigned to a short
float, but under IEEE, the maximum value that a short float can hold is
about 3.40281E+38.

IBM1088I W FLOAT literal is too big for its implicit precision. The E
in the exponent will be replaced by a D.

The precision for a float literal is implied by the number of digits in
its mantissa. For instance 1e99 is implicitly FLOAT DECIMAL(1), but the
value 1e99 is larger than the largest value a FLOAT DECIMAL(1) can hold.

IBM1089I W Control variable in DO loop cannot exceed TO value, and loop
may be infinite.

If the TO value is equal to the maximum value that a FIXED or PICTURE
variable can hold, then a loop dominated by that variable will run
endlessly unless exited inside the loop by a LEAVE or GOTO. For example,
in the first code fragment below, x can never be bigger than 99, and
the loop would be infinite.  In the second code fragment below, y can
never be bigger than 32767, and the loop would be infinite.

     dcl x pic'99';

     do x = 1 to 99;
       put skip list( x );
     end;

     dcl y fixed bin(15);

     do y = 1 to 32767;
       put skip list( y );
     end;

IBM1090I W Constant used as locator qualifier.

An expression contains a reference to a based variable with a constant
value for its locator qualifier. This may cause a protection exception
on some systems. It may also indicate that the variable was declared as
based on NULL or SYSNULL and that this constant value is being used as
its locator qualifier.

     dcl a fixed bin(31) based( null() );

     a = 0;

IBM1091I W FIXED BIN precision less than storage allows.

Except in unusual circumstances, the precision in a FIXED BIN declaration
should be 7, 15, 31 or 63 if SIGNED and one greater if UNSIGNED. This
message may indicate that a declare specified, for example, FIXED BIN(8)
when UNSIGNED FIXED BIN(8) was meant.

IBM1092I W GOTO whose target is or may be in another block severely
limits optimization.

Try to change the code so that it sets and tests a switch instead,
or limit GOTOs to very small modules that do not need optimization.

IBM1093I W PLIXOPT string is invalid. See related runtime message
message- number.

The PLIXOPT string could not be parsed. See the cited LE message for
more detail.

IBM1094I W Element option in PLIXOPT is invalid. See related runtime
message message-number.

The PLIXOPT string contains an invalid item. See the cited LE message
for more detail.

IBM1095I W Element option in PLIXOPT has been remapped to option. See
related runtime message message- number.

The PLIXOPT string contains a run-time option which is not supported by
LE. See the cited LE message for more detail.

IBM1096I W STAE and SPIE in PLIXOPT is not supported. See related runtime
message message-number.

The SPIE and STAE options have been replaced by the TRAP option. TRAP(ON)
is equivalent to SPIE and STAE; TRAP(OFF) is equivalent to NOSPIE and
NOSTAE. The combination SPIE and NOSTAE and the combination NOSPIE and
STAE are no longer supported. See the cited LE message for more detail.

IBM1097I W Scalar accepted as argument number argument-number in ENTRY
reference ENTRY name although parameter description specifies an array.

Generally, scalars should not be passed where arrays are expected,
but in some situations, this may be what you want.

    dcl a entry( (*) fixed bin ) option(nodescriptor);

    call a( 0 );

IBM1098I W Extraneous comma at end of statement ignored.

A comma was followed by a semicolon rather than by a valid syntactical
element (such as an identifier). The comma will be ignored in order to
make the semicolon valid.

Under RULES(IBM), when a comparison or arithmetic operation has an operand
that is FIXED BIN and an operand that is FIXED DEC with a non-zero scale
factor, then the FIXED DEC operand will be converted to FIXED BIN. Under
RULES(ANS), when a comparison or arithmetic operation has an operand that
is FIXED BIN and an operand that is FIXED DEC with a zero scale factor,
then the FIXED DEC operand will be converted to FIXED BIN. In each case,
significant digits may be lost, and if there is a fractional part, it may
not be exactly represented as binary. For instance, under RULES(IBM),
the assignment statement below will cause the target to have the value
29.19, and in the comparison, C will be converted to FIXED BIN(31,10)
and significant digits will be lost (in fact, SIZE would be raised,
but since it is disabled, this program would be in error).

     dcl a fixed dec(07,2) init(12.2); dcl b fixed bin(31,0) init(17);
     dcl c fixed dec(15,3) init(2097151); dcl d fixed bin(31,0) init(0);

     a = a + b;

     if c = d then;

IBM1100I W The attribute attribute-option is not valid on BEGIN blocks
and is ignored.

An attribute (REDUCIBLE in the example below) has been specified in the
OPTIONS clause on a BEGIN statement, but that attribute is not valid
for BEGIN blocks.

     begin options( reducible );

IBM1101I W option-name is not a known PROCEDURE attribute and is ignored.

    dcl 1 a, 2 b fixed bin, 2 c fixed bin, ;

IBM1099I W FIXED DEC(source- precision,source-scale) operand will be
converted to FIXED BIN(target-precision,target-scale).  Significant digits
may be lost.

An attribute (DATAONLY in the example below) has been specified in the
OPTIONS clause on a PROCEDURE statement, but that attribute is not valid
for PROCEDUREs.

     a: proc options( dataonly );

IBM1102I W option-name is not a known BEGIN attribute and is ignored.

     (nofofl): if (x+y) > 0 then

IBM1107I W option-name is not a known ENTRY statement attribute and
is ignored.

The indicated attribute is valid on PROCEDURE statements, but not on
BEGIN statements.

   begin recursive;

IBM1103I W option-name is not a supported compiler option and is ignored.

An attribute (DATAONLY in the example below) has been specified in the
OPTIONS clause on an ENTRY statement, but that attribute is not valid
for ENTRY statements.

     a: entry options( dataonly );

The compiler option is not supported on this platform.

IBM1108I W *process map;

IBM1104I W Suboptions of the compiler option option-name are not supported
and are ignored.

The character char specified in the option option is already defined
and may not be redefined. The redefinition will be ignored.

A character specified in the OR, NOT, QUOTE or NAMES compiler option is
already defined in the PL/I character set or by another compiler option.

Suboptions of the compiler option are not supported on this platform.

   *process not('='); *process not('!') or('!');

   *process list(4);

IBM1105I W A suboption of the compiler option option-name is too long. It
is shortened to length number-of- letters.

Various compiler options have limits on the size of subfields. Refer to
the Programming Guide for the limits of specific compiler options.

   *process margini( '+-' );

IBM1106I W Condition prefixes on keyword statements are ignored.

Condition prefixes are not allowed on DECLARE, DEFAULT, IF, ELSE, DO,
END, SELECT, WHEN or OTHERWISE statements.

IBM1109I W The second argument in the C- format item will be ignored.

If you wish to display the real and imaginary parts of a complex number
using different formats, use the REAL and IMAG built-in functions and
2 format items.

     put edit ( x ) ( c( e(10,6), e(10,6) ) );

IBM1110I W The INCLUDE statement should be on a line by itself. The
source on the line after the INCLUDE statement is ignored.

Split the text into 2 lines.

     %include x; %include y;

IBM1111I W CHECK prefix is not supported and is ignored.

The CHECK prefix is not part of the SAA PL/I language.

     (check): i = j + 1;

A comment ends in a different file than it begins. This may indicate
that an end-of-comment statement is missing.

IBM1117I W String spans more than one file.

IBM1112I W condition-name condition is not supported and is ignored.

The CHECK and PENDING conditions are not part of the SAA PL/I language.

A string ends in a different file than it begins. This may indicate that
a closing quote is missing.

IBM1118I W Delimiter missing between nondelimiter and nondelimiter. A
blank is assumed.

     on check ...

IBM1113I W verb-name statement is not supported and is ignored.

A delimiter (for example, a blank or a comma) is required between all
identifiers and constants.

     dcl 1 a, 2 b, 3c;

The named statement, for example the CHECK statement, is not part of the
SAA PL/I language.  IBM1119I W IBM1114I W Comparands are both constant.

Code generated for DO group would be more efficient if control variable
name were not an aggregate member.

Both operands in a comparison are constant, and consequently, the result
of the comparison is also a constant. If this comparison is the expression
in an IF clause, for example, this means that either the THEN or ELSE
clause will never be executed.

IBM1115I W INITIAL list contains count items, but the array variable
name contains only array size. Excess is ignored.

The control variable in the DO loop is a member of an array, a structure
or a union, and consequently, the code generated for the loop will not
be optimal.

IBM1120I W Multiple closure of groups. END statements will be inserted
to close intervening groups.

For an array, an INITIAL list should not contain more values than the
array has elements.

Using one END statement to close more than one group of statements is
permitted, but it may indicate a coding error.

IBM1121I W Missing character assumed.

    dcl a init( 1, 2 ), b(5) init( (10) 0 );

IBM1116I W Comment spans more than one file.

The indicated character is missing, and there are no more characters
in the source. The missing character has been inserted by the parser in
order to correct your source.

IBM1122I W Missing character assumed before character.

The indicated character is missing and has been inserted by the parser
in order to correct your source.

     dcl f file env( regional(5) );

     display( 'Program starting' ;

IBM1127I W option-name is not a known ENVIRONMENT option. It will
be ignored.

IBM1123I W The ENVIRONMENT option option- name has been specified without
a suboption. The option option-name is ignored.

There is no such supported ENVIRONMENT option.

     dcl f file env( unknown );

Certain ENVIRONMENT options, such as RECSIZE, require suboptions.

IBM1128I W dcl f file env( recsize );

IBM1124I W A suboption has been specified for the ENVIRONMENT option
option- name. The suboption will be ignored.

The ENVIRONMENT option option- name conflicts with the LANGLVL compiler
option. The option will be ignored.

The indicated option is valid only with LANGLVL(OS).

     dcl f file env( fb );

Certain ENVIRONMENT options, such as CONSECUTIVE, should be specified
without any suboptions.

IBM1129I W verb-name processor-name statement ignored up to closing
semicolon.

     dcl f file env( consecutive(1) );

IBM1125I W The ENVIRONMENT option option- name has been specified more
than once.

An EXEC SQL or EXEC CICS statement has been found in the source
program. The compiler will ignore these statements.

     exec sql ...;

ENVIRONMENT options should not be repeated.

IBM1130I W The external name identifier is too long. It will be shortened
to identifier.

     dcl f file env( consecutive consecutive );

IBM1126I W The ENVIRONMENT option option- name has an invalid suboption.
The option will be ignored.

The maximum length of external names is set by the EXTNAME suboption of
the LIMITS compiler option.

The suboption type is incorrect.

     dcl this_name_is_long  static external pointer;

IBM1131I W An EXTERNAL name specification for name has been specified
on its PROCEDURE statement and in the EXPORTS clause of the PACKAGE
statement. The EXPORTS specification will be used.

The name specified in the EXTERNAL attribute in the EXPORTS clause
overrides the name specified in the EXTERNAL attribute on the PROCEDURE
statement.

     a: package exports( b ext('_B') );

       b: proc  ext( 'BB' );

IBM1132I W An EXTERNAL name specification for name has been specified
in its declaration and in the RESERVES clause of the PACKAGE statement.
The RESERVES specification will be used.

The named variable defines a statement label array, but not all the
elements in that array are labels for statements in the containing
procedure.

     l(1): display( ... );

     l(3): display( ... );

IBM1135I W Logical operand is constant.

An argument to one of the logical operators (or, and or not) is a
constant. The result of the operation may also be a constant. If this
operation is the expression in an IF clause, for example, this means
that either the THEN or ELSE clause will never be executed.

     if a | '1'b then

IBM1136I W Function invoked as a subroutine.

The name specified in the EXTERNAL attribute in the RESERVES clause
overrides the name specified in the EXTERNAL attribute in the DECLARE
statement.

     a: package reserves( b ext('_B') );

       dcl b ext( 'BB' ) static ...

IBM1133I W The FORMAT CONSTANT array label-name is not fully initialized.

An element of a FORMAT CONSTANT array has not been defined, for example,
f(2) in the example below.

     f(1): format( x(2), a );

     f(3): format( x(4), a );

IBM1134I W The LABEL CONSTANT array label- reference is not fully
initialized.

A function, for example, a PROCEDURE or ENTRY statement with the RETURNS
attribute, has been invoked in a CALL statement. The value that is
returned by the function will be discarded, but the OPTIONAL attribute
should be used to indicate that this is valid.

IBM1137I W The attribute attribute is invalid in GENERIC descriptions
and will be ignored.

The named attribute is invalid in GENERIC description lists.

     dcl g generic ( f1 when( connected ),
                     f2 otherwise );

IBM1138I W Number of items in INITIAL list is count for the array variable
name which contains array size elements.

The array will be incompletely initialized. If the named variable is
part of a structure, subsequent elements in

that structure with this problem will be flagged with message 2602. This
may be a programming error (in the example below, 4 should probably have
been 6) and may cause exceptions when the program is run.

     %skip(2000);

     dcl a(8) fixed dec init( 1, 2, (4) 0 );

IBM1139I W Syntax of the CONTROL statement is incorrect.

The %CONTROL statement must be followed by FORMAT or NOFORMAT option
enclosed in parentheses and then a semicolon.

IBM1140I W Syntax of the LANGLVL option in the OPTION statement is
incorrect.

The LANGLVL option in the %OPTION statement must be specified as either
LANGLVL(SAA) or LANGLVL(SAA2).

IBM1141I W Syntax of the NOPRINT statement is incorrect.

The %NOPRINT statement must be followed, with optional intervening blanks,
by a semicolon.

IBM1142I W Syntax of the PAGE statement is incorrect.

The %PAGE statement must be followed, with optional intervening blanks,
by a semicolon.

IBM1143I W Syntax of the PRINT statement is incorrect.

The %PRINT statement must be followed, with optional intervening blanks,
by a semicolon.

IBM1144I W Number of lines specified with SKIP must be between 0 and
999 inclusive.

Skip amounts greater than 999 are not supported.

IBM1145I W Syntax of the SKIP statement is incorrect.

The %SKIP statement must be followed by a semicolon with optional
intervening blanks and a parenthesized integer.

IBM1146I W Syntax of the TEST option in the OPTION statement is incorrect.

The TEST option in the %OPTION statement must be specified without
any suboptions.

IBM1147I W Syntax of the NOTEST option in the OPTION statement is
incorrect.

The NOTEST option in the %OPTION statement must be specified without
any suboptions.

IBM1148I W Syntax of the PUSH statement is incorrect.

The %PUSH statement must be followed, with optional intervening blanks,
by a semicolon.

IBM1149I W Syntax of the POP statement is incorrect.

The %POP statement must be followed, with optional intervening blanks,
by a semicolon.

IBM1150I W Syntax of the NOTE statement is incorrect.

The %NOTE statement must be followed by, in parentheses, a note and an
optional return code, and then a semicolon.

IBM1151I W FIXED BINARY precision is reduced to maximum value.

The maximum FIXED BIN precision depends on the LIMITS option.

This message is used by %NOTE statements with a return code of 4.

IBM1152I W FIXED DECIMAL precision is reduced to maximum value.

IBM1158I W A option is missing in the specification of the option option.
One is assumed.

The maximum FIXED DEC precision depends on the LIMITS option.

IBM1153I W FLOAT BINARY precision is reduced to maximum value.

The maximum FLOAT BIN precision is 64 on Intel, 106 on AIX and 109
on z/OS.

IBM1154I W FLOAT DECIMAL precision is reduced to maximum value.

A closing quote or parenthesis is missing in the specification of a
compiler option. A quoted string must not cross line boundaries.

IBM1159I W The string option is not recognized as a valid option keyword
and is ignored.

An invalid compiler option has been specified.

IBM1160I W The third argument to the MARGINS option is not supported.

The maximum FLOAT DEC precision is 18 on Intel, 32 on AIX and 33 on z/OS
except for DFP which has a maximum of 34.

IBM1155I W The aggregate aggregate-name contains noncomputational
values. Those values will be ignored.

Printer control characters are not supported on input source records.

IBM1161I W The suboption suboption is not valid for the option compiler
option.

Some members of an aggregate referenced in an I/O statement are
noncomputational. The computational members will be correctly processed,
but the noncomputational ones will be ignored.

A suboption of a compiler option is incorrect. The suboption may be
unknown or outside the allowable range.

   dcl 1 x,
         2 y ptr, 3 fixed bin(31);
   put skip list(x);

   *process flag(q)  margins(1002);

IBM1162I W A required suboption is missing for the suboption option.

IBM1156I W Arguments to MAIN PROCEDURE are not all POINTER.

A required suboption of a compiler option is missing.

Under SYSTEM(CICS), SYSTEM(TSO) and SYSTEM(IMS), the arguments to the
MAIN procedure should all have type POINTER.

   *process or;

IBM1163I W IBM1157I W

note

Required sub-fields are missing for the option option. Default values
are assumed.

Required suboptions of a compiler option are missing.

   *process margins;

IBM1164I W option-name should be specified within OPTIONS, but is accepted
as is.

The option, for example REORDER, is accepted outside of the OPTIONS
attribute, but it should be specified within the OPTIONS attribute. This
would also conform to the ANSI standard.

IBM1165I W The OPTIONS option option-name has been specified more
than once.

The only supported LINKAGE options are OPTLINK and SYSTEM.

IBM1166I W suboption-name is not a known option-name suboption. The
option-name option will be ignored.

The only supported LINKAGE suboptions are OPTLINK and SYSTEM, and the
only supported CMPAT suboptions are V1, V2, V3, and LE.

IBM1167I W Maximum number of PUSH statements exceeded. The control
statement is ignored.

The maximum number of pending %PUSH statements is 63.

IBM1168I W No PUSH statements are in effect.  The POP control statement
is ignored.

This message applies to the FIXED and FLOAT built- in functions when
only one argument is given. The precision is not set to a default, but
is instead derived from the argument. For example, if x is FLOAT BIN(21),
FIXED(x) will return a FIXED BIN(21) value.

IBM1170I W The OPTIONS attribute option- attribute is not supported and
is ignored.

The indicated element of the OPTIONS list is not supported.

    dcl a ext entry options( nomap );

IBM1171I W SELECT statement contains no WHEN or OTHERWISE clauses.

WHEN or OTHERWISE clauses are not required on SELECT statements, but
their absence may indicate a coding error.

IBM1172I W A zero length string has been entered for the option-name
option. The option is ignored.

User-specified string has zero length. This can occur when OR('') has
been specified on the command line or when the backslash character is
specified as the only character in the OR string. In the latter case,
the backslash character has been interpreted as an escape character,
and so the string appears to have zero length.

IBM1173I W SELECT statement contains no WHEN clauses.

A %POP has been issued when no %PUSH statement are pending.

SELECT statements do not require WHEN clauses, but their absence may
indicate a coding error.

IBM1169I W No precision was specified for the result of the builtin name
built- in function. The precision will be determined from the argument.

IBM1174I W The reference in the from-into clause clause may not be byte-
aligned.

The reference specified in the FROM or INTO clause may not be
byte-aligned. If the reference is indeed not byte-aligned, unpredictable
results may occur.

IBM1175I W FIXED BINARY constant contains too many digits. Excess
nonsignificant digits will be ignored.

The maximum precision for FIXED BINARY constants is specified by the
FIXEDBIN suboption of the LIMITS compiler option.

larger than the largest value a FLOAT DECIMAL(1) can hold.

IBM1180I W Argument to BUILTIN name is not byte aligned.

This message applies to the ADDR, CURRENTSTORAGE/SIZE and STORAGE/SIZE
built-in functions. Applying any one of these built-in functions to a
variable that is not byte-aligned may not produce the results you expect.

IBM1181I W A WHILE or UNTIL option at the end of a series of DO
specifications applies only to the last specification.

IBM1176I W FIXED DECIMAL constant contains too many digits. Excess
nonsignificant digits will be ignored.

The maximum precision for FIXED DECIMAL constants is specified by the
FIXEDDEC suboption of the LIMITS compiler option.

IBM1177I W Mantissa in FLOAT BINARY constant contains more digits than
the implementation maximum.  Excess nonsignificant digits will be ignored.

Float binary constants are limited to 64 digits on Intel, 32 on AIX and
33 on z/OS.

IBM1178I W Mantissa in FLOAT DECIMAL constant contains more digits than
the implementation maximum.  Excess nonsignificant digits will be ignored.

Float decimal constants are limited to 18 digits on Intel, 106 on AIX
and 109 on z/OS.

IBM1179I W FLOAT literal is too big for its implicit precision. An
appropriate HUGE value is assumed.

The precision for a float literal is implied by the number of digits in
its mantissa. For instance 1e99 is implicitly FLOAT DECIMAL(1), but the
value 1e99 is

In the following code snippet, the WHILE clause applies only to the last
DO specification, that is only when I = 5;

    do i = 1, 3, 5 while( j < 5 );

IBM1182I W Invocation of a NONRECURSIVE PROCEDURE from within that
PROCEDURE is invalid.  RECURSIVE attribute is assumed.

A procedure contains code that will cause it to be recursively invoked,
but the procedure was not declared with RECURSIVE attribute.

    a: proc( n );
       ...  if n > 0 then call a;

IBM1183I W condition-name condition is disabled. Statement is ignored.

The SIGNAL statement is ignored if the condition it would raise is
disabled. Some conditions, like SIZE, are disabled by default.

    (nofofl): signal fixedoverflow;

IBM1184I W Source with length string-length in INITIAL clause for
variable name has length greater than the length string-length of that
INITIAL variable.

The string in the INITIAL clause ('TooBig' in the example below) will
be trimmed to fit (to 'TooB').

    call x( 'TooBig' );

IBM1188I W Result of concatenating two strings is too long.

The length of the string produced by concatenating two strings must not
be greater than the maximum allowed for the derived string type.

    dcl x char(4) static init('tooBig');

IBM1189I W IBM1185I W

Source with length string-length in RETURN statement has length greater
than that in the corresponding RETURNS attribute.

NODESCRIPTOR attribute conflicts with the NONCONNECTED attribute for
the parameter parameter name. CONNECTED is assumed.

The string in the RETURNS clause ('TooBig' in the example below) will
be trimmed to fit (to 'TooB').

    x: proc returns( char(4) );
       ...  return( 'TooBig' );

IBM1186I W Source with length string-length in string assignment has
length greater than the length string- length of the target.

If NODESCRIPTOR is specified (or implied) for a procedure, aggregate
parameters should have the CONNECTED attribute. The CONNECTED attribute
can be explicitly coded, or it can be implied by the DEFAULT(CONNECTED)
compiler option.

IBM1190I W The OPTIONS option option-name conflicts with the LANGLVL
compiler option. The option will be applied.

The named option is not part of the PL/I language definition as specified
in the LANGLVL compiler option.

IBM1191I W Result of FIXED BIN divide will not be scaled.

The source in the assignment ('TooBig' in the example below) will be
trimmed to fit (to 'TooB').

    dcl x char(4); x = 'TooBig';

IBM1187I W Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference entry name
has length string-length which is greater than that of the corresponding
parameter.

The source in the entry invocation ('TooBig' in the example below)
will be trimmed to fit (to 'TooB').

    dcl x entry( char(4) );

When dividing a FIXED BIN(p1,0) value by a FIXED BIN(p2,0) value where 31
> p1, the result will have the attributes FIXED BIN(p1,0). With ANSI 76,
it would have the attributes FIXED BIN(31,31-p1).

IBM1192I W WHEN clauses contain duplicate values.

In a dominated SELECT statement, if a WHEN clause has the same value as
an earlier WHEN clause, the code for the second WHEN clause will never
be executed. This message will be produced only if the SELECT statement
is otherwise suitable for transformation into a branch table.

IBM1193I W statement count statements in block block name.

This message is produced if a block contains more statements than
allowed by the MAXSTMT compiler option. It may point to blocks that are
excessively large.

The %LINE directive must be followed, with optional intervening blanks,
by a parenthesis, a line number, a comma, a file name and a closing
parenthesis.

IBM1194I W More than one argument to MAIN PROCEDURE.

   %line( 19, test.pli );

A MAIN procedure should have at most one argument, except under
SYSTEM(CICS) and SYSTEM(IMS).

IBM1195I W Argument to MAIN PROCEDURE is not CHARACTER VARYING.

The argument to the MAIN procedure should be CHARACTER VARYING, except
under SYSTEM(CICS), SYSTEM(TSO) and SYSTEM(IMS).

IBM1196I W AREA initialized with EMPTY - INITIAL attribute is ignored.

Any INITIAL attribute specified for an AREA variable is ignored. The
variable will, instead, be initialized with the EMPTY built-in function.

IBM1197I W file-name assumed as file condition reference.

All file conditions should be qualified with a file reference, but
ENDFILE and ENDPAGE are accepted without a file reference. SYSIN and
SYSPRINT are then assumed, respectively.

IBM1198I W A null argument list is assumed for variable name.

An ENTRY reference is used where the result of invoking that entry is
probably meant to be used.

   dcl e1 entry returns( ptr ); dcl q  ptr based; e1->q = null();

   dcl e2 entry returns( bit(1) ); if e2 then ...

IBM1199I W Syntax of the LINE directive is incorrect.

IBM1200I W Use of DATE built-in function may cause problems.

The DATE built-in returns a two-digit year. It might be better to use
the DATETIME built-in which returns a four-digit year.

IBM1201I W suboption conflicts with a previously specified suboption
for the option compiler option.

There is a conflict of suboptions for the LANGLVL compiler option. The
SAA2 and OS suboptions are mutually exclusive.

   *process langlvl(saa2 os);

IBM1202I W Syntax of the OPTION statement is incorrect.

The only option supported in the %OPTION statement is the LANGLVL option.

IBM1203I W Argument to PLITEST is ignored.

Change the invocation of PLITEST so that no argument is passed.

IBM1204I W INTERNAL CONSTANT assumed for initialized STATIC LABEL.

LABEL variables require block activation information, and hence they
cannot be initialized at compile- time. For a STATIC LABEL variable with
the INITIAL attribute, if the variable is a member of a structure or a
union, a severe message will be issued. Otherwise, its attributes will
be changed to INTERNAL CONSTANT in order to eliminate the requirement
for block activation

information. Such a variable must be initialized with LABEL CONSTANTs
from containing blocks.

IBM1205I W Arguments of the option compiler option must be the same
length.

If two arguments of the NAMES option are specified, they must be the same
length. The second argument is the uppercase value of the first. If a
character in the first string does not have an uppercase value, use the
character itself as the uppercase value. For example:

     names( '$!@' '$!@')

IBM1206I W BIT operators should be applied only to BIT operands.

Since ISAM is not being simulated on the OS/2 platform, the file will
be treated in a manner similar to VSAM KSDS. The file specified in the
first declaration below would be handled in the same manner as the file
in the second declaration. Both are treated as ORGANIZATION(INDEXED).

     dcl f1 file env(indexed); dcl f2 file env(organization(indexed));

IBM1210I W The field width specified in the keyword-format item may be
too small for complete output of the data item.

In an expression of the form x & y, x | y, or x ^ y, x and y should both
have BIT type.

The format width will be too small for output if the number is
negative. It might be valid if the format is being used for input.

IBM1207I W Operand to LENGTH built-in function should have string type.

IBM1211I W Source with length string-length in string assignment has
length greater than the length string- length of the target variable.

If the operand has a numeric type, the result is the length that value
would have after it was converted to string. The length of a numeric
type is NOT the same as its storage requirement.

IBM1208I W INITIAL list for the array variable name contains only
one item.

The source in the assignment ('TooBig' in the example below) will be
trimmed to fit (to 'TooB'). If the target is a pseudovariable, message
1186 is issued instead.

    dcl x char(4); x = 'TooBig';

The array will be incompletely initialized. If the named variable is
part of a structure, subsequent elements in that structure with this
problem will be flagged with message 2603. An asterisk can be used
as an initialization factor to initialize all the elements with one
value. In the example below, a(1) is initialized with the value 13,
while the elements a(2) through a(8) are uninitialized. In contrast,
all the elements in b are initialized to 13.

IBM1212I W The A format item requires an argument when used in GET
statement. An L format item is assumed in its place.

A width must be specified on A format items when specified on a GET
statement.

     dcl a(8) fixed bin init( 13 ); dcl b(8) fixed bin init( (*) 13 );

     get edit(name) (a);

IBM1209I W INDEXED environment option for file file name will be treated
as ORGANIZATION(INDEXED).

IBM1213I W The PROCEDURE proc name is not referenced.

The named procedure is not external and is never referenced in any live
code in the compilation unit.  This may represent an error (if it was
supposed to be called) or an opportunity to eliminate some dead code.

IBM1214I W A dummy argument will be created for argument number
argument-number in ENTRY reference entry name.

       2 b,
         2 c, 2 d;

IBM1217I W An unnamed structure member is declared without any data
attributes. A level number may be incorrect.

An argument passed BYADDR to an entry does not match the corresponding
parameter in the entry description. The address of the argument will
not be passed to the entry. Instead, the argument will be assigned to
a temporary with attributes that do match the parameter in the entry
description, and the address of that temporary will be passed to the
entry. This means that if the entry alters the value of this parameter,
the alteration will not be visible in the calling routine.

   dcl e entry( fixed bin(31) ); dcl i fixed bin(15); call e( i );

IBM1215I W The variable variable name is declared without any data
attributes.

It will be given the default attributes, but this may be because of an
error in the declare. For instance, in the following example, the level
number on c and d should probably be 3.

   dcl a, b fixed bin;
     1 a,
       2 *,
         2 c, 2 d;

IBM1218I W First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function should have
string type.

To eliminate this message, apply the CHAR or BIT built-in function to
the first argument.

   dcl i fixed bin; display( substr(i,4) );

It will be given the default attributes, but this may be because of an
error in the declare. For instance, in the following example, parentheses
may be missing

IBM1219I W LEAVE will exit noniterative DO- group.

   dcl a, b fixed bin;

IBM1216I W The structure member variable name is declared without any
data attributes. A level number may be incorrect.

It will be given the default attributes, but this may be because of an
error in the declare. For instance, in the following example, the level
number on c and d should probably be 3.

   dcl a, b fixed bin;
     1 a,

This message is not produced if the LEAVE statement specifies a label. In
the following loop, the LEAVE statement will cause only the immediately
enclosing DO-group to be exited; the loop will not be exited.

   do i = 1 to n;
     if a(i) > 0 then
       do;
         call f; leave;
       end;
     else;
   end;

IBM1220I W Result of comparison is always constant.

This message is produced when a variable is compared to a constant equal
to the largest or smallest value that the variable could assume. In the
following loop, the variable x can never be greater than 99, and hence
the implied comparison executed each time through the loop will always
result in a '1'b.

   dcl x pic'99';

   do x = 1 to 99; end;

IBM1221I W Statement uses count bytes for temporaries.

This message is produced if a statement uses more bytes for temporaries
than allowed by the MAXTEMP compiler option.

IBM1222I W Comparison involving 2-digit year is problematic.

Comparisons involving data containing 2-digit year fields may cause
problems if exactly one of the years is later than 1999.

IBM1223I W Literal in comparison interpreted with DATE attribute.

In a comparison, if one comparand has the DATE attribute, the other
should also. If the non-date is a literal with a value that is valid
for the date pattern, it will be viewed as if it had the same DATE
attribute as the date comparand. So, in the following code, '670101'
will be interpreted as if it had the DATE('YYMMDD') attribute.

    dcl x char(6) date('YYMMDD');

    if x > '670101' then ...

IBM1224I W DATE attribute ignored in comparison with non-date literal.

In a comparison, if one comparand has the DATE attribute, the other
should also. If the non-date is a literal with a value that is not valid
for the date pattern,

the DATE attribute will be ignored. So, in the following code, the
comparison will be evaluated as if x did not have the DATE attribute.

    dcl x char(6) date('YYMMDD');

    if x > '' then ...

IBM1225I W DATE attribute ignored in conversion from literal.

If the target in an explicit or implicit assignment has the DATE
attribute, the source should also. If it does not, the DATE attribute
will be ignored. So, in the following code, the assignment will be
performed as if x did not have the DATE attribute.

    dcl x char(6) date('YYMMDD');

    x = '';

IBM2600I W Compiler backend issued warning messages to STDOUT.

Look in STDOUT to see the message issued by the compiler backend.

IBM2601I W Missing character assumed before character. DECLARE and other
nonexecutable statements should not have labels.

The indicated character is missing and has been inserted by the parser
in order to correct your source.

     xx: dcl test fixed bin;

IBM2602I W Number of items in INITIAL list is count for the array variable
name which contains array size elements.

The array will be incompletely initialized. If the named variable is part
of a structure, the first element in that structure with this problem
will be flagged with message 1138. This may be a programming error (in

the example below, 6 should probably have been 7) and may cause exceptions
when the program is run.

The specified line contains an invalid ANS print control character. The
valid characters are: blank, 0, -, + and 1.

     dcl
       1 a,
         2 b(8) fixed bin init( 1, (7) 29 ), 2 c(8) fixed bin init( 1,
         (6) 29 );

IBM2606I W Code generated for the REFER object reference name would be
more efficient if the REFER object had the attributes REAL FIXED BIN(p,0).

IBM2603I W INITIAL list for the array variable name contains only
one item.

The array will be incompletely initialized. If the named variable
is part of a structure, the first element in that structure with this
problem will be flagged with message 1208. An asterisk can be used as an
initialization factor to initialize all the elements with one value. In
the example below, b(1) and c(1) are initialized with the value 13, while
the elements b(2) through b(8) and c(2) through c(8) are uninitialized. In
contrast, all the elements in d are initialized to 13.

     dcl
       1 a,
         2 b(8) fixed bin init( 13 ), 2 d(8) fixed bin init( 13 ), 2 e(8)
         fixed bin init( (*) 13 );

IBM2604I W FIXED DEC(source- precision,source-scale) will be converted to
FIXED DEC(target- precision,target-scale). Significant digits may be lost.

If the source in a conversion to FIXED DECIMAL is a FIXED DECIMAL or
PICTURE variable with a different precision and scale factor, and if the
difference between the precisions is not as large as the the difference
between the scale factors, then significant digits may be lost. If the
SIZE condition were enabled, code would be generated to detect any such
occurrence, and this message would not be issued.

     dcl a fixed dec(04) init(1009); dcl b fixed dec(03);

     b = a;

IBM2605I W Invalid carriage control character.  Blank assumed.

If the REFER object has any other attributes, it will be converted to
and from REAL FIXED BIN(31,0) via library calls.

IBM2607I W PICTURE representing FIXED DEC(source-precision,source-scale)
will be converted to FIXED DEC(target-precision,target-scale).
Significant digits may be lost.

If the source in a conversion to FIXED DECIMAL is a PICTURE variable with
a different precision and scale factor, and if the difference between
the precisions is not as large as the the difference between the scale
factors, then significant digits may be lost. If the SIZE condition
were enabled, code would be generated to detect any such occurrence,
and this message would not be issued.

     dcl a pic'(4)9' init(1009); dcl b fixed dec(03);

     b = a;

IBM2608I W PICTURE representing FIXED DEC(source-precision,source-scale)
will be converted to PICTURE representing FIXED DEC(target-
precision,target-scale). Significant digits may be lost.

If the source in a conversion to a PICTURE is a PICTURE variable with
a different precision and scale factor, and if the difference between
the precisions is not as large as the the difference between the scale
factors, then significant digits may be lost. If the SIZE condition
were enabled, code would be generated to detect any such occurrence,
and this message would not be issued.

     dcl a pic'(4)9' init(1009); dcl b pic'(3)9';

IBM2612I W b = a;

The character string character string appears in more than one WHEN
clause.

IBM2609I W Comment contains a semicolon on line line-number.file-number.

If a comment contains a semicolon, it may indicate that there is an
earlier unintentionally unclosed comment that is accidentally commenting
out some source as in this example

     /* start of unclosed comment dcl b pic'(3)9'; /* next comment */

In a dominated SELECT statement, if a WHEN clause has the same value as
an earlier WHEN clause, the code for the second WHEN clause will never
be executed. This message will be produced only if the SELECT statement
is otherwise suitable for transformation into a branch table.

IBM2613I W RULES(NOLAXINOUT) violation: variable is being passed as an
INOUT parameter, but may be unset.

IBM2610I W One argument to BUILTIN name built-in function is FIXED DEC
while the other is FIXED BIN.  Compiler will not interpret precision as
FIXED DEC.

The indicated variable may not have been assigned or initialized a value
before it is used as an INOUT parameter. This is problematic unless it
is used only as an OUTONLY parameter.

IBM2614I W Both comparands are Booleans.

This message applies to the MULTIPLY, DIVIDE, ADD, and SUBTRACT built-in
functions: if one argument to one of these functions is FIXED DEC
while the other is FIXED BIN, then the specified precision will not be
interpreted as a FIXED DEC precision. This may cause improper truncation
of data. For example, the result of the following multiply will have
the attributes FIXED BIN(15), not FIXED DEC(15), and that might cause
the result to be improperly truncated.

     dcl a fixed bin(31); dcl b fixed dec(15);

     b = multiply( a, 1000, 15 );

IBM2611I W The binary value binary value appears in more than one
WHEN clause.

In a dominated SELECT statement, if a WHEN clause has the same value as
an earlier WHEN clause, the code for the second WHEN clause will never
be executed. This message will be produced only if the SELECT statement
is otherwise suitable for transformation into a branch table.

This message will flag statements such as the following, where the
"equals" is meant to be an "and" or "or".

     if ( a < b ) = ( c < d ) then

IBM2615I W DO-loop will always execute exactly once. A semicolon after
the DO may be missing.

DO-loops should normally be iterative, but if the DO- loop specification
consists of just one assignment, then it will always excute once and
only once. A semicolon after the DO may be missing, as in this example

     do
       edsaup.tprs =  ads162.tprs; edsaup.tops =  ads162.tops;
     end;

IBM2616I W Size of parameter variable will return the currentsize value
since no descriptor is available.

IBM2621I W If the SIZE or STG built-in function is applied to a CHAR(*)
VARYING (or VARYINGZ) parameter when there is no descriptor available,
then the size of the actual storage allocated to the variable cannot be
determined and only the current size can be returned.

IBM2617I W Passing a LABEL to a non-PL/I routine is very poor coding
practice and will cause the compiler to generate less than optimal code.

It is generally very unwise to pass a label to another routine. It would
be good to think about redesigning any code doing this. The compiler
will issue this message when a LABEL is passed to an ENTRY declared with
OPTIONS( COBOL ) or OPTIONS( ASM ) or OPTIONS( FORTRAN ). The only valid
use of this label in the called routine would be to pass it on to another
PL/I routine.

IBM2618I W The suboption suboption is not valid for the suboption option
of the option compiler option.

A suboption of a suboption of a compiler option is incorrect. The
suboption may be unknown or outside the allowable range.

   *process limits(extname(2000));

IBM2620I W Target structure contains REFER objects. Results are undefined
if the assignment changes any REFER object.

Changing REFER objects may not produce the expected results. For example,
in the following example, the assignment will not change any of the
elements in the array d.

     dcl
       1 a based(p),
         2 b     fixed bin(31), 2 c     fixed bin(31), 2 d( 10 refer(c) ),
           3 e   fixed bin(31), 3 f   fixed bin(31);

     a = '';

ON ERROR block does not start with ON ERROR SYSTEM. An error inside the
block may lead to an infinite loop.

The first statement in an ON ERROR block should usually be an ON ERROR
SYSTEM statement. This will tend to prevent an infinite loop if there
is an error in the rest of the code in the ON ERROR block.

IBM2622I W ENTRY used to set the initial value in a DO loop will be
invoked after any TO or BY values are set.

If the initial value in a DO loop is set via an ENTRY, then you may get
unexpected results if that ENTRY also changes the TO or BY value. For
example, in the first loop below, the function "first" should not change
the value of the variable "last". It would be better to change this code
into the form of the second loop below.

     do x = first() to last; end;

     temp = first(); do x = temp to last; end;

IBM2623I W Mixing FIXED BIN and FLOAT DEC produces a FLOAT BIN result.
Under DFP, this will lead to poor performance.

Under DFP, the conversion of FLOAT DEC to FLOAT BIN requires an expensive
library call that will lead to poor performance. To avoid this, the
DECIMAL built-in function can be applied to the FIXED BIN operand.
For example, it would be better to change the first assignment statement
into the form of the second below.

     dcl n fixed bin(31); dcl f float dec(16);

     f = n + f; f = dec(n) + f;

IBM2624I W Mixing BIT and FLOAT DEC produces a FLOAT BIN result.

Under DFP, this will lead to poor performance.

IBM2629I W No debug symbol information will be generated for identifier.

Under DFP, the conversion of FLOAT DEC to FLOAT BIN requires an
expensive library call that will lead to poor performance. To avoid
this, the DECIMAL built-in function can be applied to the BIT operand.
For example, it would be better to change the first assignment statement
into the form of the second below.

     dcl b bit(8); dcl f float dec(16);

     f = b + f; f = dec(b) + f;

IBM2625I W Mixing FLOAT BIN and FLOAT DEC produces a FLOAT BIN result.
Under DFP, this will lead to poor performance.

Under DFP, the conversion of FLOAT DEC to FLOAT BIN requires an expensive
library call that will lead to poor performance.

IBM2626I W Use of SUBSTR with a third argument equal to 0 is somewhat
pointless since the result will always be a null string.

While technically valid, a SUBSTR reference with a third argument that
is a constant of zero probably represents a coding error.

IBM2627I W No metadata will be generated for the structure identifier
since its use of REFER is too complex.

XMI metadata is generated for BASED structures using REFER only if their
use of REFER is "simple".

IBM2628I W BYVALUE parameters should ideally be no larger than 32 bytes.

No debug symbol information will be generated for the named variable,
and hence it cannot be referenced when using the debugger.

IBM2630I W The operands in a multiplication operation have the attributes
operand attributes and operand attributes which will produce a result
with the attributes result attributes. This means that its scale factor
is greater than its precision. That may lead to the loss of significant
digits and unexpected results. You may be able to avoid this problem
by reducing the the scale factor of one of the operands or by using the
MULTIPLY built-in function.

This message can occur in a multiply of x by y if the sum of the
scale factors of x and y is too large.  To eliminate this message, the
PRECISION built-in function could be used to reduce the scale factor of
one of the operands or the MULTIPLY built-in function could be used to
override the default attributes for the result.

IBM2631I W One argument to BUILTIN name built-in function is FIXED DEC
while the other is FLOAT BIN.  Compiler will not interpret precision as
FIXED DEC.

This message applies to the MULTIPLY, DIVIDE, ADD, and SUBTRACT built-in
functions: if one argument to one of these functions is FIXED DEC
while the other is FLOAT BIN, then the specified precision will not be
interpreted as a FIXED DEC precision. This may cause improper truncation
of data. For example, the result of the following multiply will have
the attributes FLOAT BIN(15), not FIXED DEC(15), and that might cause
the result to be improperly truncated.

BYVALUE parameters larger than 32 bytes require too much overhead and
are bad for performance.

     dcl a float bin(31); dcl b fixed dec(15);

     b = multiply( a, 1000, 15 );

IBM2632I W One argument to BUILTIN name built-in function is FIXED DEC
while the other is FLOAT DEC.  Compiler will not interpret precision as
FIXED DEC.

if the SELECT statement is otherwise suitable for transformation into
a branch table.

IBM2637I W An ENTRY invoked as a function should have the RETURNS
attribute.

This message applies to the MULTIPLY, DIVIDE, ADD, and SUBTRACT built-in
functions: if one argument to one of these functions is FIXED DEC
while the other is FLOAT DEC, then the specified precision will not be
interpreted as a FIXED DEC precision. This may cause improper truncation
of data. For example, the result of the following multiply will have
the attributes FLOAT DEC(15), not FIXED DEC(15), and that might cause
the result to be improperly truncated.

     dcl a float dec(15); dcl b fixed dec(15);

     b = multiply( a, 1000, 15 );

IBM2633I W Given the support for addressing arithmetic, basing a POINTER
or OFFSET on a FIXED BIN is unnecessary, and it will also fail to work
properly if the size of a POINTER changes.

If an ENTRY is used as a function, it should be declared with the RETURNS
attribute. The compiler will apply the RETURNS attribute to both of
the ENTRYs in this example, but for E, the compiler will assume it will
return FLOAT DEC while for M, it will assume it will return FIXED BIN.

    dcl e entry; dcl m entry;

    a = e(); a = m();

IBM2638I W Statement used count intermediate language instructions.

This message is produced if a statement uses more intermediate language
instructions. than allowed by the MAXGEN compiler option. It may point
to statements that are excessively complex.

Code using such variables will work only as long as the size of the
POINTER or OFFSET variable remains the same as the size of the FIXED
BIN variable.

IBM2639I W Previous statement used count intermediate language
instructions.

IBM2634I W Given the support for addressing arithmetic, basing a FIXED
BIN on a POINTER or OFFSET is unnecessary, and it will also fail to work
properly if the size of a POINTER changes.

Code using such variables will work only as long as the size of the
POINTER or OFFSET variable remains the same as the size of the FIXED
BIN variable.

IBM2636I W The ordinal ordinal name appears in more than one WHEN clause.

In a dominated SELECT statement, if a WHEN clause has the same value as
an earlier WHEN clause, the code for the second WHEN clause will never
be executed. This message will be produced only

This message is produced if a statement uses more intermediate language
instructions. than allowed by the MAXGEN compiler option. It may point
to statements that are excessively complex. This message, rather than
message IBM2638, is produced under the same situations as message IBM2638
except the STMT number option must also be in effect.

IBM2640I W Target is a REFER object. Results are undefined if an
assignment changes a REFER object.

Changing REFER objects might cause subsequent code to fail. For example,
in the following code, the first assignment causes the second assignment
to overwrite storage.

     dcl
       1 a based(p),
         2 b     fixed bin(31), 2 c     fixed bin(31), 2 d( 10 refer(c) ),
           3 e   fixed bin(31), 3 f   fixed bin(31);

     allocate a; a.c = 15; a.f = 0;;

IBM2641I W The suboption option of the option compiler option must be
followed by a (possibly empty) parenthesized list.

The named ENTRY was specified in the ENTRY suboption of the DEPRECATENEXT
option, and so any explicit or contextual declaration of it is flagged.

IBM2646I W The VARIABLE named variable will be deprecated.

The named VARIABLE was specified in the VARIABLE suboption of the
DEPRECATENEXT option, and so any explicit or contextual declaration of
it is flagged.

IBM2647I W The statementname statement will be deprecated.

A suboption of a compiler option has been incorrectly specified. It
must be followed by a left parenthesis and then a (possibly empty)
list of items and a closing right parenthesis.

   *process deprecate(builtin);

The named statement was specified in the STMT suboption of the
DEPRECATENEXT option, and so any use of that statement is flagged.

IBM2648I W Declaration contains count INITIAL items.

IBM2642I W OPTIONS(REENTRANT) is ignored.

Specifying OPTIONS(REENTRANT) on a PROCEDURE or BEGIN block has no effect
on the generated code. Your code will be reentrant only if it does not
alter any STATIC variables. You can use the DEFAULT(NONASGN) compiler
option to force the compiler to flag assignments to STATIC variables.

IBM2643I W The built-in function builtin will be deprecated.

The named built-in function was specified in the BUILTIN suboption of
the DEPRECATENEXT option, and so any explicit or contextual declaration
of it is flagged.

IBM2644I W The INCLUDE file filename will be deprecated.

The named INCLUDE file was specified in the INCLUDE suboption of the
DEPRECATENEXT option, and so any attempt to include it is flagged.

IBM2645I W The ENTRY named entryname will be deprecated.

Change the declaration to STATIC, or remove the INITIAL items and copy
the INITIAL items from a STATIC variable.

IBM2649I W The binary value binary value appears more than once in the
INLIST argument set.

In INLIST( x, y1, y2, ... ), no y value should appear twice. This message
will be produced only if the INLIST function is otherwise suitable for
transformation into a branch table.

IBM2650I W The ordinal ordinal name appears more than once in the INLIST
argument set.

In INLIST( x, y1, y2, ... ), no y value should appear twice. This message
will be produced only if the INLIST function is otherwise suitable for
transformation into a branch table.

IBM2651I W Block block name contains count branches.

This message is produced if a block contains more branches than allowed
by the MAXBRANCH compiler option. It may point to blocks that are
excessively complex.

In the following example, DEFBUF does not overlay the first 10 bytes of
BUFFER. Instead, each array element of DEFBUF overlays the first byte
of the first byte of the corresponding array element of BUFFER.

IBM2652I W REINIT reference contains no element with an INITIAL attribute.

In the statement REINIT x, x should contain some element with an INITIAL
attribute. If not, no code will be generated for the statement.

IBM2653I W The list of preprocessor options must be enclosed in quotation
marks.

     DCL BUFFER(10)      CHAR (300); DCL DEFBUF(10)      CHAR(1)
     DEF BUFFER;

IBM2657I W Both logical AND operands are identical.

This is probably a coding error.

IBM2658I W Both logical OR operands are identical.

For example, rather than specifying PP(SQL(VERSION(AUTO))), specify
PP(SQL('VERSION(AUTO)')).

This is probably a coding error.

IBM2654I W INITIAL attribute for BASED on ADDR has no effect on the
base variable.

IBM2659I W Generated code would be better if all the INITIAL attributes
in the declare for variable name were changed to VALUE.

The INITIAL attribute for BASED has an effect only if the BASED variable
is used in an ALLOCATE statement.  But for code such as the following,
it has no effect on either the variable A or B.

     dcl a fixed bin(31); dcl b bit(32) based(addr(a)) init(''b);

If an AUTOMATIC or STATIC structure consists entirely of scalar fields
all of which have the INITIAL attribute and none of which have their
address taken, then the compiler could probably generate much better
code if all the INITIAL keywords were change to VALUE keywords. If the
STATIC or AUTOMATIC attribute is explicitly specified, it would also
have to be removed from the declare.

IBM2655I W Some options conflict with the non-overridable options.

IBM2660I W Program logic may lead to the END statement for procedure
name even though procedure name is a function that should return a value.

If the 2 strings in the IBMZIOP module are equal, then different values
for the options specified there are not allowed in the +DD options files,
the invocation parameter, the options environment variable or the PROCESS
statements. The conflicting options will be ignored.

IBM2656I W Simple defining applies to variable name. If string-overlay
defining is intended, then add POS(1) to its declaration.

This message warns that the compiler has detected code that could lead
to an error under some conditions.

    oops: proc( x ) returns( fixed bin(31 );
      dcl x fixed bin(31); select;
        when( x > 0 ) return( 1 ); when( x = 0 ) return( 0 ); otherwise;

      end;
    end;

CHARACTER VARYING INITIAL and is not an array.

The compiler will issue this message for E15 sort exits unless the E15
sort exit specifies the OPTIONAL attribute as part of the RETURNS option
on its PROCEDURE statement.

IBM2661I W The string string value appears more than once in the INLIST
argument set.

In INLIST( x, y1, y2, ... ), no y value should appear twice. This message
will be produced only if the INLIST function is otherwise suitable for
transformation into a branch table.

If an EXTERNAL variable is intended to define LE runtime options, then
it must be a scalar CHAR VARYING string with an INITIAL value.

IBM2666I W RETURN expression holds the address of a variable in AUTOMATIC
storage.

Returning the address of a variable in AUTOMATIC storage is likely to
produce code that cannot work successfully.

IBM2662I W INLIST argument set contains duplicate values.

IBM2667I W In INLIST( x, y1, y2, ... ), no y value should appear
twice. This message will be produced only if the INLIST function is
otherwise suitable for transformation into a branch table.

IBM2663I W WHEN clause contains an expression that matches the previous
expression in the containing SELECT statement.

In a SELECT statement, if a WHEN clause has the same expression as
the previousr expression in the WHEN clauses in that SELECT statement,
then the code is probably in error. The compiler will not report all
such errors, but only those where an expression is duplicated in one of
the four previous expressions.

IBM2664I W WHEN clause contains an expression that matches the expression
count previous in the containing SELECT statement.

In a SELECT statement, if a WHEN clause has the same expression as one
of the earlier expressions in the WHEN clauses in that SELECT statement,
then the code is probably in error. The compiler will not report all
such errors, but only those where an expression is duplicated in one of
the four previous expressions.

IBM2665I W EXTERNAL PLIXOPT declare specifies run-time options only if
the variable has the attribute

The string lengths in the declare for first depend on the size of second
whose declare comes later in the block. Consider moving the first declare
after the second.

The extents in one declare should not depend on the size of a later
declare. The compiler will swap the two declares, but this might
introduce other problems. It might be better to move the first declare
after the second.

IBM2668I W Using the VALUE function with the structure type type adds
count bytes to the generated object.

This message is produced if a typed structure with some VALUE attributes
needs more bytes than allowed by the MAXINIT compiler option. Use of
the VALUE type function will add a full copy of the structure to the
generated object's constant area and may lead to binder problems.

IBM2669I W The attribute keyword attribute is ignored in an ALIAS
definition.

Attributes such as ALIGNED and UNALIGNED may be specified in a DEFINE
ALIAS statement, but they will be ignored and should be removed.

IBM2670I W The parameter to MAIN should be declared as CHAR(*) VARYING.

The parameter to MAIN has a maximum length that depends on the system
and should not be declared with a fixed maximum length.

IBM2671I W The variable X is passed as argument number n to entry E. The
corresponding parameter has the A attribute, and hence the variable
could be modified despite having the D attribute.

Code like this could lead to a protection exception.  In the following
example, snce the variable X is NONASSIGNABLE, the compiler could have
passed the address of a constant fullword 17 to the routine TEST. If so,
if E changed its parameter (as the attribute OUTONLY says it could),
then a protection exception would result.

    call oops( 17 );

    test: proc( x );
      dcl x fixed bin(31) NONASSIGNABLE; dcl e ext entry( ASSIGNABLE fixed
bin(31) );
      call e(x);
    end;

IBM2672I W If extent-variable is constant, then removing its STATIC
attribute and changing its INITIAL attribute to the VALUE attribute
would improve the performance of the generated code.

Named constants should be declared with the VALUE attribute rather than
the attributes STATIC INIT. This will cause the compiler to generate much
better code.  For example, in the following code, if ASIZE and CLEN are
constant, ten it would be much better to change their declares.

     dcl asize fixed bin(31) static init(100); dcl clen  fixed bin(31)
     static init(20);

     dcl a(asize) char(clen);

IBM2673I W Boolean is compared with something other than a BIT(1)
restricted expression.

This message will flag statements such as the following. In the first IF
statement, it would be better if "true" were a named constant, i.e. if
it were declared with the VALUE attribute rather than STATIC INIT In the
second IF statement, the true/false value of (a < b ) is compared to c,
and this will be true for any value of c that is bigger than 1. The IF
clause is probably meant to be (a < b ) & (b < c).

     dcl true bit(1) static init('1'b);

     if ( a < b ) = true then

     if a < b < c then

IBM2674I W The defined structure struct name is alignment byte aligned,
but occupies only storage size bytes of storage. This may lead to
addressing problems and data corruption.

Defined structures must occupy a number of bytes that is a multiple
of the structure s alignment. So, for example, if a structure contains
an aligned fixed bin(31) (or other aligned fullword) field as its most
stringently aligned item, then the structure must occupy a multiple of
4 bytes. The following structure does not meet this requirement:

    define structure
      1 point,
        2 x  fixed bin(31), 2 y  char(1);

IBM2675I W Use of PICTURE as DO control variable is not recommended.

If the control variable in a DO loop is a PICTURE variable, then more
code will be generated for the loop than if the control variable were
a FIXED BIN variable.  Moreover, such loops may easily be miscoded so
that they will loop infinitely.

IBM2676I W Code generated for DO group would be more efficient if control
variable had type FIXED BIN with zero scale factor.

The control variable in the DO loop has one of the types: scaled fixed
binary, nonnative fixed binary, fixed decimal, or picture. Consequently,
the code generated for the loop will not be optimal.

The control variable in the DO loop should have storage class STATIC
or AUTOMATIC and not PARAMETER and especially not BASED, DEFINED,
or CONTROLLED,

IBM2677I W Generated code would be better if the declare for variable
name were changed from AUTOMATIC to STATIC NONASSIGNABLE.

IBM2681I W The named variable is an array that is initialized but appears
never to be changed. If it is constant, the compiler would not generate
code to initialize it every time the block where it is declared is
entered.  This change could potentially signiifcantly improve performance.

IBM2678I W Loop will never be run. TO value may be incorrect.

The DO statement has the form DO x = A to B; where A > B. or the form
DO x = A to B BY -1; where A < B. This will cause the loop body to be
skipped. One or more of the values A and B may be incorrect.

     do jx = 11 to 10;

IBM2685I W . . .

     end;

IBM2679I W GONUMBER(SEPARATE) changed to GONUMBER(NOSEPARATE) since the
SEPARATE suboption for the GONUMBER option should be specified only when
the TEST option and its SEPARATE suboption are also specified.

Source has length source-length which is greater than the length of the
source pattern source- pattern. Unless the source has enough leading
blanks, invoking this REPATTERN will cause the ERROR condition to be
raised. The required checking will also cause this REPATTERN not to
be inlined.

In REPATTERN( d, p, q ), if LENGTH( d ) is larger than LENGTH( q ), the
code is valid only if d starts with as many blanks as the difference in
those lengths.

IBM2682I W The variable name needs count storage bytes which exceeds
the MAXSTATIC limit.

This message is produced if a STATIC variable requires more space than
allowed by the MAXINIT compiler option.

Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference entry name is a
constant, but the corresponding parameter has the attribute OUTONLY.

It is very questionable to pass a constant to a parameter that is declared
as OUTONLY.

    dcl x entry( char(4) outonly ); call x( 'Test' );

The GONUMBER can be placed in the SEPRATE sidefile only if the TEST
options specifies that the sidefile should be created.

IBM2686I W IBM2680I W

Code generated for DO group would perform better if control variable
was STATIC or AUTOMATIC.

Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference entry name is a
constant, but the corresponding parameter has the explicit attribute
INOUT.

It is questionable to pass a constant to a parameter that is declared
explicitly as INOUT.

    dcl x entry( char(4) inout );

    call x( 'Test' );

Chapter 3. Compiler Error Messages (1226-1499, 2400-2599)

IBM1226I E Area extent is reduced to maximum value.

of only a semicolon) will be inserted in place of the FORMAT statement.

The maximum size allowed for an AREA variable is 16777216.

IBM1227I E keyword statement is not allowed where an executable
statement is required. A null statement will be inserted before the
keyword statement.

In certain contexts, for example after an IF-THEN clause, only executable
statements are permitted. A DECLARE, DEFINE, DEFAULT or FORMAT statement
has been found in one of these contexts. A null statement, (a statement
consisting of only a semicolon) will be inserted before the offending
statement.

IBM1228I E DEFAULT statement is not allowed where an executable statement
is required. The DEFAULT statement will be enrolled in the current block,
and a null statement will be inserted in its place.

In certain contexts, for example after an IF-THEN clause, only executable
statements are permitted. A DEFAULT statement has been found in one
of these contexts. A null statement (a statement consisting of only a
semicolon) will be inserted in place of the DEFAULT statement.

IBM1229I E FORMAT statement is not allowed where an executable statement
is required. The FORMAT statement will be enrolled in the current block,
and a null statement will be inserted in its place.

In certain contexts, for example after an IF-THEN clause, only executable
statements are permitted. A FORMAT statement has been found in one of
these contexts. A null statement (a statement consisting

IBM1230I E Arguments have been specified for the variable variable name,
but it is not an entry variable.

Argument lists are valid only for ENTRY references.

   dcl a(15) entry returns( fixed bin(31) ); i = a(3)(4);

IBM1231I E Arguments/subscripts have been specified for the variable
variable name, but it is neither an entry nor an array variable.

Argument/subscript lists are valid only for ENTRY and array references.

   dcl a fixed bin; i = a(3);

IBM1232I E RULES(NOLAXPUNC) violation: extraneous comma at end of
statement ignored.

A comma was followed by a semicolon rather than by a valid syntactical
element (such as an identifier). The comma will be ignored in order to
make the semicolon valid. Under RULES(LAXPUNC), a message with the same
text, but lesser severity would be issued

    dcl 1 a, 2 b fixed bin, 2 c fixed bin, ;

IBM1233I E RULES(NOLAXPUNC) violation: missing character assumed.

37

The indicated character is missing, and there are no more characters
in the source. The missing character has been inserted by the parser in
order to correct your source. Under RULES(LAXPUNC), a message with the
same text, but lesser severity would be issued

IBM1234I E RULES(NOLAXPUNC) violation: missing character assumed before
character.

The indicated character is missing and has been inserted by the parser
in order to correct your source.  Under RULES(LAXPUNC), a message with
the same text, but lesser severity would be issued

    i = isll( n, 221 );

IBM1239I E The attribute attribute is not supported and is ignored.

The named attribute is either not part of the PL/I language or is not
supported on this platform.

   dcl f file transient;

IBM1240I E The attribute attribute is invalid in a RETURNS descriptor.

     display( 'Program starting' ;

IBM1235I E No data format item in format list.

The RETURNS descriptor may not specify an array.

   dcl a entry returns( (12) fixed bin );

Data items cannot be transmitted unless a data format item is given in
the format list.

IBM1241I E Equality and inequality are the only valid comparisons of
COMPLEX numbers.

   put edit ( (130)'-' ) ( col(1) );

IBM1236I E Subscripts on keyword labels are ignored.

A label specified on a PROCEDURE, PACKAGE or ENTRY statement should have
no subscripts.

Equal and not equal are defined for complex variables, but you have
attempted to relate them in some other way.

IBM1242I E Equality and inequality are the only valid comparisons of
program control data.

IBM1237I E EXTERNAL ENTRY attribute is assumed for variable-name.

An undeclared variable is used with an arguments list. This should give
it a contextual declaration as BUILTIN, but its name is not that of a
built-in function.

IBM1238I E The second argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function is
greater than the precision of the result.

The sift amount in ISLL is should not be greater than the precision of
the result.

Other relationships between program control data are not defined. Perhaps
a variable was misspelled.

IBM1243I E REGIONAL(integer specification (2 or 3)) ENVIRONMENT option
is not supported.

REGIONAL(2) and REGIONAL(3) ENVIRONMENT options are syntax-checked during
compile-time but are not supported during run-time.

IBM1244I E The variable specified as the option value in an ENVIRONMENT
option must be a STATIC scalar

with the attributes REAL FIXED BIN(31,0).

IBM1249I E Argument to BUILTIN name built-in function should have
CHARACTER type.

This applies to the KEYLENGTH, KEYLOC and RECSIZE suboptions.

IBM1245I E The variable specified as the option value in an ENVIRONMENT
option must be a STATIC scalar with the attribute CHARACTER.

This applies to the PASSWORD suboption.

The argument to the named built-in function should have CHARACTER
type. The required implicit conversion will be performed, but this may
indicate a programming error.

IBM1252I E RULES(NOLAXCONV) violation: argument number argument number
to BUILTIN name built-in function should have arithmetic type.

IBM1246I E Argument to BUILTIN name built-in function should be CONNECTED.

This message applies, for example, to the ADDR built- in function. The
value returned by the ADDR function is the address of the first byte
of its argument. If you use this pointer to refer to a based variable,
the variable may be mapped over storage occupied by some other variable,
rather than the storage occupied by the argument.

IBM1247I E RULES(NOLAXCONV) violation: arithmetic operands should both
be numeric.

The required implicit conversions will be performed, but this may indicate
a programming error. This message will not be issued if the RULES(LAXCONV)
option is specified.

   i = i * '2';

IBM1248I E RULES(NOLAXCONV) violation: argument to BUILTIN name built-
in function should have arithmetic type.

The argument to the named built-in function should have arithmetic
type. The required implicit conversion will be performed, but this may
indicate a programming error. This message will not be issued if the
RULES(LAXCONV) option is specified.

The required implicit conversion will be performed, but this may indicate
a programming error. This message will not be issued if the RULES(LAXCONV)
option is specified.

   x = max( x, y, z, '2' );

IBM1254I E RULES(NOLAXCONV) violation: arithmetic prefix operand should
be numeric.

The required implicit conversion will be performed, but this may indicate
a programming error. This message will not be issued if the RULES(LAXCONV)
option is specified.

   a = - b;

IBM1272I E Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built-in
function is negative. It will be changed to 0.

The second argument to built-in functions such as COPY and REPEAT must
be nonnegative.

    x = copy( y, -1 );

IBM1273I E Third argument to BUILTIN name built-in function is
negative. It will be changed to 0.

The third argument to built-in functions such as COMPARE, PLIFILL,
and PLIMOVE must be nonnegative.

    call plimove( a, b, -1 );

IBM1274I E RULES(NOLAXIF) violation: conditional expression does not
have the attributes BIT(1).

Expressions in IF, WHILE, UNTIL and undominated WHEN clauses should
have the attributes BIT(1) NONVARYING. If not, the expression should be
compared to an appropriate null value. This message will not be issued
if the RULES(LAXIF) option is specified.

    dcl x bit(8) aligned;
     ...
    if x then ...

IBM1281I E OPTIONS(RETCODE) on ATTACH reference is invalid and will
be ignored.

OPTIONS(RETCODE) is not supported on ATTACH references.

IBM1287I E RULES(NOLAXCONV) violation: exponentiation operands should
have numeric type.

In an expression of the form x**y, x and y should not have string
type. This message will not be issued if the RULES(LAXCONV) option
is specified.

The maximum length allowed for a WIDECHAR variable is set by the STRING
suboption of the LIMITS option.

IBM1294I E BIT extent is reduced to maximum value.

The maximum length allowed for a BIT variable is set by the STRING
suboption of the LIMITS option.

IBM1295I E Sole bound specified is less than 1. An upper bound of 1
is assumed.

The default lower bound is 1, but the upper bound must be greater than
the lower bound.

    dcl x(-5) fixed bin;

IBM1296I E The BYADDR option conflicts with the SYSTEM option.

The arguments passed to the MAIN procedure when SYSTEM(IMS) or
SYSTEM(CICS) is in effect should not have the BYADDR attribute.

  *process system(ims);
   a: proc( x );
     dcl x ptr byaddr;

IBM1297I E Source and target in BY NAME assignment have no matching
assignable base identifiers.

In a BY NAME, the source and target structures should have at least one
matching base element identifier.

IBM1293I E WIDECHAR extent is reduced to maximum value.

    dcl 1 a, 2 b, 2 c, 2 d; dcl 1 w, 2 x, 2 y, 2 z; a = w, by name;

IBM1298I E Characters in B3 literals must be 0-7.

In a B3 literal, each character must be either 0-7.

IBM1299I E CHARACTER extent is reduced to maximum value.

The DIMENSION, HBOUND and LBOUND built-in functions require that the
second argument be positive.

The maximum length allowed for a CHARACTER variable is set by the STRING
suboption of the LIMITS option.

IBM1300I E RULES(NOLAXDCL) violation: variable name is contextually
declared as attribute.

This is an E-level message because RULES(NOLAXDCL) has been specified.

IBM1301I E A DECIMAL exponent is required.

IBM1305I E Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in function is greater
than the number of dimensions for the first argument. A value of dimension
count is assumed.

The second argument to the LBOUND, HBOUND, and DIMENSION built-in
functions must be no greater than the number of dimensions of their
array arguments.

    dcl a(5,10) fixed bin; do i = 1 to lbound(a,3);

IBM1306I E Repeated declaration of identifier is invalid and will
be ignored.

An E in a FLOAT constant must be followed by at least one decimal digit
(optionally preceded by a sign).

IBM1302I E The limit on the number of DEFAULT predicates in a block has
already been reached. This and subsequent DEFAULT predicates in this
block will be ignored.

Level 1 variable names must not be repeated in the same block.

    dcl a fixed bin, a float;

Each block should contain no more than 31 DEFAULT predicates.

IBM1307I E Duplicate specification of arithmetic precision. Subsequent
specification ignored.

IBM1303I E A second argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function must be
supplied for arrays with more than one dimension. A value of 1 is assumed.

The precision attribute must be specified only once in a declare.

    dcl a fixed(15) bin(31);

The LBOUND, HBOUND, and DIMENSION built-in functions require two arguments
when applied to arrays having more than one dimension.

IBM1308I E Repeated declaration of identifier is invalid. The name will
be replaced by an asterisk.

    dcl a(5,10) fixed bin; do i = 1 to lbound(a);

IBM1304I E Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in function is not
positive. A value of 1 is assumed.

The variable names at any given sublevel within a structure or union
must be unique.

    dcl 1 a, 2 b fixed, 2 b float;

IBM1309I E Duplicate specification of attribute. Subsequent specification
ignored.

    do; if a > b then; end; else a = 0;

IBM1315I E END label matches a label on an open group, but that group
label is subscripted.

Attributes like INITIAL must not be repeated for an element of a DECLARE
statement.

END statements for groups with a subscripted label must have labels that
are also subscripted.

    dcl a fixed init(0) bin init(2);

IBM1310I E The attribute character conflicts with previous attributes
and is ignored.

    a(1): do;
      ...
    end a;

Attributes must be consistent.

     dcl a fixed real float;

IBM1316I E END label is not a label on any open group.

A Label on END statement must match a LABEL on an open BEGIN, DO, PACKAGE,
PROCEDURE, or SELECT statement.

IBM1311I E EXTERNAL name contains no non- blank characters and is ignored.

    a: do;
      ...
    end b;

The external name should contain some nonblank characters.

IBM1317I E An END statement may be missing after an OTHERWISE unit. One
will be inserted.

    dcl x external( '  ' );

IBM1312I E WX literals should contain a multiple of 4 hex digits.

After an OTHERWISE unit in a SELECT statement, only an END statement
is valid.

WX literals must represent unicode strings and hence must contain a
multiple of 4 hex digits.

    x = '00'wx;

    select;
      when ( ... )
        do; end;
      otherwise
        do; end;
    display( .... );

IBM1314I E ELSE clause outside of an open IF- THEN statement is ignored.

IBM1318I E ELSE clauses are valid immediately after an IF-THEN statement.

The ENVIRONMENT option option- name conflicts with preceding ENVIRONMENT
options. This option will be ignored.

There was a conflict detected in the ENVIRONMENT options specification. In
the example ENV(CONSECUTIVE INDEXED), the INDEXED option conflicts with
the CONSECUTIVE option.

IBM1319I E STRINGSIZE condition raised while evaluating expression.
Result is truncated.

During the conversion of a user expression during the compilation, the
target string was found to be shorter than the source, thus causing the
STRINGSIZE condition to be raised.

IBM1320I E STRINGRANGE condition raised while evaluating expression.
Arguments are adjusted to fit.

If all the arguments in a SUBSTR reference are constants or restricted
expressions, the reference will be evaluated at compile- time and the
STRINGRANGE condition will occur if the arguments do not comply with
the rules described for the SUBSTR built-in function.

    a: do loop;
      begin;
        leave a;

IBM1323I E ITERATE/LEAVE statement is invalid outside an open DO
statement. The statement will be ignored.

ITERATE/LEAVE statements are valid only inside DO groups.

    a: begin;
      ...  leave a; ...
    end a;

IBM1324I E The name name occurs more than once in the EXPORTS clause.

Names in the EXPORTS clause of a package statement must be unique.

    a = substr( 'abcdef', 5, 4 );

    a: package exports( a1, a2, a1 );

IBM1321I E LEAVE/ITERATE label matches a label on an open DO group,
but that DO group label is subscripted.

IBM1325I E LEAVE/ITERATE statements for groups with a subscripted label
must have labels that are also subscripted.

The name name occurs in the EXPORTS clause, but is not the name of any
nonnested PROCEDURE.

Each name in the EXPORTS clause of a package statement must be the name
of some level-1 procedure in that package.

    a: package exports( a1, a2, a3 );

    a(1): do;
      ...  leave a;

IBM1322I E LEAVE/ITERATE label is not a label on any open DO group in
its containing block.

IBM1326I E Variables declared without a name must be structure members
or followed by a substructure list.

LEAVE/ITERATE must specify a label on an open DO loop in the same block
as the LEAVE/ITERATE statement.

An asterisk may be used only for structure or union names, or for members
of structures or unions. An

asterisk may not be used for a level-1 structure name that specifies
the LIKE attribute.

in GET statement. A value of 1 is assumed.

    dcl * char(20) static init('who can use
me');

IBM1327I E The CHARACTER VARYING parameter to MAIN should be ASCII with
the attribute NATIVE.

A width must be specified on A, B, and G format items when specified on
a GET statement.

     get edit(name) (a);

IBM1333I E Non-asterisk array bounds are not permitted in GENERIC
descriptions.

If the parameter is EBCDIC or has the attribute NONNATIVE, unpredictable
results can occur.

IBM1328I E The CHARACTER VARYING parameter to MAIN should be EBCDIC with
the attribute BIGENDIAN.

All array bounds in generic descriptions must be asterisks.

    dcl x generic ( e1 when( (10) fixed ), ...

If the parameter is ASCII or has the attribute LITTLEENDIAN, unpredictable
results can occur. This message applies only to SYSTEM(MVS) etc.

IBM1334I E String lengths and area sizes are not permitted in GENERIC
descriptions.

IBM1329I E ENTRY statements are not allowed under RULES(NOMULTIENTRY).

Under RULES(NOMULTIENTRY), there should be no ENTRY statements in your
source program.

IBM1330I E The I in an iSUB token must be bigger than zero. A value of
1 is assumed.

The I in an iSUB token must represent a valid dimension number.

     dcl b(8) fixed bin def(0sub,1);

IBM1331I E The I in an iSUB token must have no more than 2 digits. A
value of 1 is assumed.

All string lengths and area sizes in generic descriptions must be
asterisks.

    dcl x generic ( e1 when( char(10) ), ...

IBM1335I E Entry description lists are not permitted in GENERIC
descriptions.

Any ENTRY attribute in a generic description list must not be qualified
with an entry description list.

    dcl x generic ( e1 when( entry( ptr ) ), ...

IBM1336I E GRAPHIC extent is reduced to maximum value.

The I in an iSUB token must have only 1 or 2 digits.

     dcl b(8) fixed bin def(001sub,1);

IBM1332I E The format-item format item requires an argument when used

The maximum length allowed for a GRAPHIC variable is set by the STRING
suboption of the LIMITS option.

IBM1337I E GX literals should contain a multiple of 4 hex digits.

    dcl f ext entry options( cobol );

    dcl 1 a union, 2 b char(4), 2 c fixed
bin(31);

GX literals must represent graphic strings and hence must contain a
multiple of 4 hex digits.

    call f( a );

    x = '00'gx;

IBM1342I E Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY
name contains non-constant extents. NOMAP is assumed.

IBM1338I E Upper bound is less than lower bound. Bounds will be reversed.

A variable has been declared with an upper bound that is less than its
lower bound. The upper and lower bounds will be swapped in order to
correct this. For example, DECLARE x(3:1) will be changed to DECLARE
x(1:3).

IBM1339I E Identifier is too long. It will be collapsed to identifier.

The maximum length of an identifier is set by the NAME suboption of the
LIMITS compiler option.

IBM1340I E Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY
name contains BIT data. NOMAP is assumed.

An argument containing non-constant extents has been found in a call to
a COBOL routine. Mapping of such structures between PL/I and COBOL is
not supported.

    dcl f ext entry options( cobol );

    dcl n static fixed bin init(17);

    dcl 1 a, 2 b char(n), 2 c fixed bin(31);

    call f( a );

IBM1343I E nomap-suboption is invalid as a suboption of option.

The suboption should be specified as ARGn where "n" is an integer greater
than 0.

An argument containing BIT data has been found in a call to a COBOL
routine. Mapping of such structures between PL/I and COBOL is not
supported.

    dcl f ext entry options( cobol
nomap(arg0) );

    dcl f ext entry options( cobol );

    dcl 1 a, 2 b bit(8), 2 c bit(8);

    call f( a );

IBM1341I E Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY
name is or contains a UNION.  NOMAP is assumed.

IBM1344I E NOMAP specifications are valid only for ILC routines.

NOMAP, NOMAPIN and NOMAPOUT are valid only for COBOL, FORTRAN and ASM
Procedures and Entrys.

IBM1345I E Initial level number in a structure is not 1.

The level-1 DECLARE statement may be missing.

An argument containing UNION data has been found in a call to a COBOL
routine. Mapping of such structures between PL/I and COBOL is not
supported.

    dcl
      2 a,

        3 b, 3 c,

IBM1346I E INIT expression should be enclosed in parentheses.

This is required to avoid ambiguities. For example, it is unclear whether
all of the elements should be initialized with the value 4 or if the
first element should be initialized with the value 9.

    dcl a(5) fixed bin init( (5)+4 );

IBM1347I E B assumed to complete iSUB.

There is no language element of the form 1su.

    dcl a(10) def b(1su, 1sub );

IBM1348I E Digit in BINARY constant is not zero or one.

In a BINARY constant, each digit must be a zero or one.

IBM1349I E Characters in BIT literals must be 0 or 1.

In a BIT literal, each character must be either zero or one.

IBM1350I E Character with decimal value n does not belong to the PL/I
character set. It will be ignored.

The indicated character is not part of the PL/I character set. This can
occur if a program containing NOT or OR symbols is ported from another
machine and those symbols are translated to a character that is not
part of the PL/I character set. Using the NOT and OR compiler options
can help avoid this problem.

IBM1351I E Characters in hex literals must be 0-9 or A-F.

In a hex literal, each character must be either 0-9 or A-F.

IBM1352I E The statement element character is invalid. The statement
will be ignored.

The statement entered could not be parsed because the specified element
is invalid.

IBM1353I E Use of underscore as initial character in an identifier
accepted although invalid under LANGLVL(SAA).

Under LANGLVL(SAA), identifiers must start with an alphabetic character
or with one of the extralingual characters. They may not start with
an underscore.  Under LANGLVL(SAA2), identifiers may start with an
underscore, although names starting with _IBM are reserved for use by IBM.

IBM1354I E Multiple argument lists are valid only with the last identifier
in a reference.

A reference of the form x(1)(2).y.z is invalid.

IBM1355I E Empty argument lists are valid only with the last identifier
in a reference.

A reference of the form x().y.z is invalid.

IBM1356I E Character with decimal value n does not belong to the PL/I
character set. It is assumed to be an OR symbol.

The indicated character is not part of the PL/I character set, but was
immediately followed by the same character. This can occur if a program
containing an OR symbol is ported from another machine and this symbol
is translated to a character that is not part of the PL/I character
set. Using the OR compiler option can help avoid this problem.

IBM1357I E Character with decimal value n does not belong to the PL/I

character set. It is assumed to be a NOT symbol.

The indicated character is not part of the PL/I character set, but was
immediately followed by an =, < or > symbol. This can occur if a program
containing a NOT symbol is ported from another machine and this symbol
is translated to a character that is not part of the PL/I character
set. Using the NOT compiler option can help avoid this problem.

IBM1358I E The scale factor specified in BUILTIN name built-in function
with a floating-point argument must be positive. It will be changed to 1.

The name of a LABEL constant cannot be also used as the name of a FORMAT
constant.

    f(1): ;

    f(2): format( a, x(2), a );

IBM1362I E The label label-name has already been declared. The explicit
declaration of the label will not be accepted.

Declarations for label constant arrays are not permitted.

This applies to the ROUND built-in function. The non- positive value
will be changed to 1.

    dcl a(10) label variable;

    dcl x float bin(53); x = round( x, -1 );

IBM1359I E Names in RANGE(identifier:identifier) are not in ascending
order. Order is reversed.

The names must be in ascending order.

    default range( h : a ) fixed bin;

IBM1360I E The name identifier has already been defined as a FORMAT
constant.

    a(1): ...  a(2): ...

IBM1363I E Structure level greater than 255 specified. It will be replaced
by 255.

The maximum structure level supported is 255.

    dcl
      1 a,
        256 b, 2 c,

IBM1364I E Elements with level numbers greater than 1 follow an element
without a level number. A level number of 1 is assumed.

The name of a FORMAT constant cannot be used as the name of a LABEL
constant as well.

A structure level is probably missing.

    f(1): format( a, x(2), a );

    f(2): ;

    dcl
        a, 2 b, 2 c,

IBM1361I E The name identifier has already been defined as a LABEL
constant.

IBM1365I E Statement type resolution requires too many lexical units to

be examined. The statement will be ignored.

To determine if a statement is an assignment or another PL/I statement,
many elements of the statement may need to be examined. If too many have
to be examined, the compiler will flag the statement as in error. For
instance, the following statement could be a DECLARE until the equal
sign is encountered by the lexer.

    dcl ( a, b, c ) = d;

    dcl
      1 a,
        2 b union,
          2 c1  fixed bin(31), 2 c2  float bin(21),
        ...

IBM1369I E MAIN has already been specified in the PACKAGE.

OPTIONS(MAIN) may be specified for only one PROCEDURE in a PACKAGE. All
but the first specification will be ignored.

IBM1370I E Extent expression is negative. It will be replaced by the
constant 1.

IBM1366I E Level number following LIKE specification is greater than
than the level number for the LIKE specification. LIKE attribute will
be ignored.

Extents must be positive.

    dcl x char(-10);

LIKE cannot be specified on a parent structure or union.

IBM1371I E RULES(NOLAXQUAL) violation: structure element identifier is
not dot qualified.

    dcl
      1 a like x,
        2 b, 2 c,

IBM1367I E Statements inside a SELECT must be preceded by a WHEN or an
OTHERWISE clause. Statement is ignored.

A WHEN or OTHERWISE may be missing.

    select;
      i = i + 1; when ( a > 0 )
        ...

Under the option RULES(NOLAXQUAL), all structure elements should be
qualified with the name of at least one of their parents.

IBM1372I E EXTERNAL specified on internal entry point.

The EXTERNAL attribute is valid only on external procedures and entrys:
for example, in a non-package, only on the outermost procedure and entry
statements contained in it, and in a package, only on the procedures
and entrys listed in the EXPORTS clause of the PACKAGE statement.

IBM1368I E The attribute character is invalid if it is not followed by
an element with a greater logical level.

The named attribute is valid only on parent structures.

    a: proc;
      b: proc ext('_B');

IBM1373I E RULES(NOLAXDCL) violation: variable variable name is implicitly
declared.

Under the RULES(NOLAXDCL) option, all variables must be declared except
for contextual declarations of built-in functions, SYSPRINT and SYSIN.

IBM1374I E Contextual attributes conflicting with PARAMETER will not be
applied to variable name.

Only those contextual attributes that can be applied to a parameter will
be applied. For example, CONSTANT and EXTERNAL, which apply to contextual
file declarations, will not be applied to file parameters.

Scale factors are valid only for FIXED values.

    x = binary(1e0,4,2);

IBM1378I E An arguments list or subscripts list has been provided for
a GENERIC ENTRY reference. It will be ignored.

GENERIC entry references are not allowed to contain an arguments or
subscripts list.

    a: proc( f );

      open file( f );

    dcl t generic( sub1(10) when((*)),
                   sub2     when((*,*)) );

IBM1375I E The DEFINED variable variable name does not fit into its
base variable.

IBM1379I E Locator qualifier for GENERIC reference is ignored.

The number of bits, characters or graphics needed for a DEFINED variable
must be no more than in the base variable.

GENERIC references cannot be locator-qualified.

    dcl x generic ( ... );

    call p->x;

    dcl a char(10);

    dcl b char(5) defined ( a ) pos( 8 );

IBM1380I E IBM1376I E

Factoring of level numbers into declaration lists containing level numbers
is invalid. The level numbers in the declaration list will be ignored.

Only attributes can be factored into declaration lists.

    dcl 1 a, 2 ( b, 3 c, 3 d ) fixed;

IBM1377I E A scale factor has been specified as an argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function, but the result of that function has type
FLOAT. The scale factor will be ignored.

Target structure in assignment contains no elements with the ASSIGNABLE
attribute. No assignments will be generated.

In an assignment to a structure, some element of the structure must have
the assignable attribute.

    dcl
      1 a based,
        2 nonasgn fixed bin, 2 nonasgn fixed bin;

    p->a = 0;

IBM1381I E DEFINED base for a BIT structure should be aligned.

If a BIT structure (or union) is defined on a variable that is not
aligned on a byte boundary, unpredictable results may occur. This is
especially true if a substructure of the DEFINED variable is passed to
another routine.

IBM1382I E INITIAL attribute is invalid for STATIC FORMAT
variables. Storage class is changed to AUTOMATIC.

FORMAT variables require block activation information; they cannot
be initialized at compile-time.  If the variable were a member of a
structure, the storage class would not be changed to AUTOMATIC, and a
severe message would be issued instead.

* extents. The NODESCRIPTOR attribute will be ignored.

A parameter can have * extents only if a descriptor is also passed. The
NODESCRIPTOR attribute will be ignored, and descriptors will be assumed
to have been passed for all array, structure and string arguments.

    a: proc( x ) options(nodescriptor);

      dcl x char(*);

IBM1388I E The NODESCRIPTOR attribute is invalid when any parameters
have the NONCONNECTED attribute.

IBM1383I E Labels on keyword statements are invalid and ignored.

Labels are not permitted on DECLARE, DEFAULT, and DEFINE statements or
on WHEN and OTHERWISE clauses.

IBM1384I E message

This message is used to report back end error messages.

IBM1385I E Invalid DEFINED - string overlay defining attempted.

A parameter can have the NONCONNECTED attribute only if a descriptor is
also passed.

    a: proc( x ) options(nodescriptor);

      dcl x(20) fixed bin nonconnected;

IBM1389I E The identifier identifier is not the name of a built-in
function. The BUILTIN attribute will be ignored.

The BUILTIN attribute can be applied only to identifiers that are the
names of built-in functions or subroutines.

The base variable in the DEFINED attribute must consist of UNALIGNED,
NONVARYING string variables of the same string type as the DEFINED
variable.

IBM1390I E note

IBM1386I E DEFINED base for a BIT variable should not be subscripted.

When one bit variable is defined on a second (the base), the base may
be an array, but it must not be subscripted.

This message is used by %NOTE statements with a return code of 8.

IBM1391I E End-of-source has been encountered after an unmatched comment
marker.

An end-of-comment marker is probably missing.

    dcl a(20) bit(8) unaligned; dcl b bit(8) defined( a(3) );

IBM1392I E End-of-source has been encountered after an unmatched quote.

IBM1387I E The NODESCRIPTOR attribute is invalid when any parameters have

A closing quote is probably missing.

IBM1393I E Item in OPTIONS list conflicts with other attributes in
the declaration.  option-name is ignored.

The indicated element of the options list is invalid.

    dcl a file options( assembler );

The indicated element of the options list is invalid for nested PROCEDUREs
(although it may be valid for PROCEDUREs).

    a: proc;
      b: proc options( main );

IBM1398I E Invalid item in OPTIONS list.  option-name is ignored.

IBM1394I E Item in OPTIONS list is invalid for BEGIN blocks. option-name
is ignored.

The indicated element of the options list is not a supported option in
any statement or declaration.

    a: proc options( unknown );

The indicated element of the options list is invalid for BEGIN blocks
(although it may be valid for PROCEDUREs).

IBM1399I E Item in OPTIONS list is invalid for ENTRY
statements. option-name is ignored.

    begin options( assembler );

IBM1395I E Item in OPTIONS list is invalid for PACKAGEs. option-name
is ignored.

The indicated element of the options list is invalid for ENTRY statements
(although it may be valid for PROCEDUREs).

    a: entry options( chargraphic );

The indicated element of the options list is invalid for PACKAGEs
(although it may be valid for PROCEDUREs).

IBM1400I E Item in OPTIONS list conflicts with preceding
items. option-name is ignored.

    a: package exports(*) options( assembler );

IBM1396I E Item in OPTIONS list is invalid for PROCEDUREs. option-name
is ignored.

The elements of the options list must be consistent, unlike in the
example where BYVALUE and BYADDR conflict.

The indicated element of the options list is invalid for PROCEDUREs
(although it may be valid for ENTRYs).

    a: procedure options( inter );

IBM1397I E Item in OPTIONS list is invalid for nested
PROCEDUREs. option-name is ignored.

    a: proc options( byvalue byaddr );

IBM1401I E Parameter attributes have been specified for a variable that
is not a parameter. The parameter attributes are ignored.

    dcl b entry returns( ptr, ptr );

Parameter attributes, such as BYVALUE or CONNECTED, may be specified
only for parameters.

IBM1406I E a: proc;
      dcl x byvalue ptr;

IBM1402I E Constant in POSITION attribute is less than 1.

The POSITION attribute must specify a positive value.

The product of the repetition factor repetition-factor and the length of
the constant string to which it is applied is greater than the maximum
length allowed for a constant. The repetition factor will be ignored.

The string represented by a repetition factor applied to another string
must conform to the same limits imposed on strings without repetition
factors.

    dcl a def b pos(-10);

    a = (32767) 'abc';

IBM1403I E The end of the source was reached before the logical end
of the program. Null statements and END statements will be inserted as
necessary to complete the program.

The source should contain END statements for all PACKAGEs, PROCEDUREs,
BEGIN blocks, DO groups, and SELECT statements, as well as statements
for all IF-THEN and ELSE clauses.

IBM1404I E The PROCEDURE name proc-name has already been declared.
The explicit declaration of the PROCEDURE name will not be accepted.

Declarations for internal procedures are not permitted.

IBM1407I E Scale factor is bigger than 127. It will be replaced by 127.

Scale factors must lie between -128 and 127 inclusive.

IBM1408I E Scale factor is less than -128. It will be replaced by -128.

Scale factors must lie between -128 and 127 inclusive.

IBM1409I E A SELECT statement may be missing. A SELECT statement,
without an expression, will be inserted.

A WHEN or OTHERWISE clause has been found outside of a SELECT statement.

IBM1410I E Semicolon inserted after ELSE keyword.

    a: proc;
      dcl b entry options(byvalue); b: proc;

IBM1405I E Only one description is allowed in a returns descriptor.

An END statement enclosing a statement such as DO or SELECT has been
found before the statement required after ELSE.

A function can return only one value.

    do;
      if a > b then
        ...
      else
    end;

IBM1411I E Semicolon inserted after ON clause.

IBM1417I E Second argument in BUILTIN name reference is less than 1. It
will be replaced by 1.

An END statement enclosing a statement such as DO or SELECT has been
found before the statement required after ON condition.

    do;
      ...  on zdiv
    end;

IBM1412I E Semicolon inserted after OTHERWISE keyword.

An END statement may be misplaced or a semicolon may be missing.

IBM1413I E Semicolon inserted after THEN keyword.

An END statement may be misplaced or a semicolon may be missing.

IBM1414I E Semicolon inserted after WHEN clause.

An END statement may be misplaced or a semicolon may be missing.

Otherwise the STRINGRANGE condition would be raised.

IBM1418I E Second argument in BUILTIN name reference is too big. It will
be trimmed to fit.

Otherwise the STRINGRANGE condition would be raised.

IBM1419I E Third argument in BUILTIN name reference is less than 0. It
will be replaced by 0.

Otherwise the STRINGRANGE condition would be raised.

IBM1420I E The factor in K/M constant is too large and is replaced by
maximum factor.

The maximum K constant is 2097151K, and the maximum M constant is 2047M.

IBM1421I E More than 15 dimensions have been specified. Excess will
be ignored.

IBM1415I E Source file does not end with the logical end of the program.

The source file contains statements after the END statement that closed
the first PACKAGE or PROCEDURE. These statements will be ignored, but
their presence may indicate a programming error.

IBM1416I E Subscripts have been specified for the variable variable name,
but it is not an array variable.

The maximum number of dimensions allowed for a variable, including all
inherited dimensions, is 15.

IBM1422I E Maximum of 500 LIKE attributes per block exceeded.

A block should contain no more than 500 LIKE references. Under
LANGLVL(SAA2), there is no limit.

IBM1423I E UNALIGNED attribute conflicts with AREA attribute.

Subscripts can be specified only for elements of an array.

All AREA variables must be ALIGNED.

IBM1424I E End of comment marker found when there are no open
comments. Marker will be ignored.

An ORDINAL type must have a precision larger enough to cover the range
of values defined for it.

An */ was found when there was no open comment.

IBM1425I E There is no compiler directive directive. Input up to the
next semicolon will be ignored.

See the Language Reference Manual for the list of supported compiler
directives.

   define ordinal
     colors
       ( red      init(0),
         orange   init(256) yellow   init(512) ) unsigned prec(8);

IBM1432I E The type type name is already defined. The redefinition
is ignored.

IBM1426I E Structure level of 0 replaced by 1.

Structure level numbers must be positive.

A named type may be defined only once in any block.

IBM1433I E The name name occurs more than once in the RESERVES clause.

IBM1427I E Numeric precision of 0 replaced by 1.

Numeric precisions must be positive.

Names in the RESERVES clause of a package statement must be unique.

IBM1428I E X literals should contain a multiple of 2 hex digits.

    a: package reserves( a1, a2, a1 );

An X literal may not contain an odd number of digits.

IBM1434I E The name name occurs in the RESERVES clause, but is not the
name of any level 1 STATIC EXTERNAL variable.

IBM1429I E INITIAL attribute for REFER object variable name is invalid.

In DCL 1 a BASED, 2 b FIXED BIN INIT(3), 2 c( n REFER(b)), the initial
clause for 'b' is invalid and may lead to unpredictable results.

IBM1430I E UNSIGNED attribute for type type type type name conflicts
with negative INITIAL values and is ignored.

Each name in the RESERVES clause of a package statement must be the name
of some level-1 static external variable in that package.

    a: package reserves( a1, a2, a3 );

IBM1435I E A precision value less than 1 has been specified as an argument
to the BUILTIN name built-in function. It will be replaced by 15.

If an ORDINAL type is declared with the UNSIGNED attribute, any INITIAL
values specified must be nonnegative.

Precision values must be positive.

IBM1431I E PRECISION specified for type type type type name is too small
to cover its INITIAL values and is adjusted to fit.

    middle = divide( todo, 2, 0 );

IBM1436I E The scale factor specified as an argument to the BUILTIN name
built-in function is out of the valid range. It will be replaced by the
nearest valid value.

In a comparison of two ENTRY variables or constants, the ENTRY and
RETURNS description lists should match. The linkages must also match.

    dcl e1 entry( fixed ), e2 entry( float );

Scale factors must be between -128 and 127 inclusive.

    if e1 = e2 then

    f = fixed( i, 15, 130 );

IBM1437I E The second argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function is
greater than the maximum FIXED BINARY precision. It will be replaced by
the maximum value.

The maximum FIXED BINARY precision supported allowed depends on the
FIXEDBIN suboption of the LIMITS option.

IBM1442I E The ENTRY/RETURNS description lists in the ENTRY to be assigned
to target variable do not match those of the target variable.

In an assignment of an ENTRY variable or constant, the ENTRY and RETURNS
description lists for the source should match those of the target. The
linkages must also match.

    dcl e1 variable entry( fixed ), e2
entry( float );

    i = signed( n, 63 );

IBM1438I E Excess arguments for ENTRY ENTRY name ignored.

    e1 = e2;

IBM1443I E An ENTRY/RETURNS description list in an ENTRY in the INITIAL
list for target variable do not match those of the target variable.

More arguments were specified in an ENTRY reference than were defined
as parameters in that ENTRY's declaration.

When initializing an ENTRY variable or constant, the ENTRY and RETURNS
description lists for the source should match those of the target. The
linkages must also match.

    dcl e entry( fixed bin ); call e( 1, 2 );

    dcl e1 variable entry( fixed ); dcl e2 variable entry( float ) init(
    e1 );

IBM1439I E Excess arguments for BUILTIN name built-in function ignored.

IBM1444I E More arguments were specified for the indicated built- in
function than are supported by that built-in function.

The ENTRY/RETURNS description lists in the RETURN statement do not match
those in the corresponding RETURNS attribute

    i = acos( j, k );

IBM1441I E ENTRY/RETURNS description lists for comparands do not match.

When a function returns an ENTRY variable or constant, the ENTRY and
RETURNS description lists in the returned ENTRY reference should match
those in the containing procedure's RETURNS option. The linkages must
also match.

   a: proc returns( entry( float ) );

    dcl e1 entry( fixed );

    return( e1 );

of any contained block, but in the block in which they are declared,
they should be used only in the executable statements.

    dcl x fixed bin(15) automatic; dcl y(x) fixed bin(15) automatic;

IBM1445I E The ENTRY/RETURNS description lists for argument number
argument-number in ENTRY reference entry name do not match those in the
corresponding parameter.

IBM1460I E Under RULES(ANS), nonzero scale factors are not permitted in
declarations of FIXED BIN.  Declared scale factor will be ignored.

This message also occurs if the linkages do not match.

    dcl a entry( entry( float ) );

    dcl e1 entry( fixed );

    call a( e1 );

RULES(IBM) allows scaled FIXED BIN, but RULES(ANS) supports it only
for FIXED DECIMAL.  RULES(ANS) will ignore the scale factors in the
following declares

    dcl x fixed bin(31,16); dcl y entry( fixed bin(31,16) );

IBM1446I E Third argument in BUILTIN name reference is too big. It will
be trimmed to fit.

IBM1461I E Otherwise the STRINGRANGE condition would be raised.

IBM1447I E Literals with an X prefix are valid only in EXEC SQL
statements.

In PL/I statements, hex literals should be specified with an X suffix.

IBM1458I E GOTO is not allowed under RULES(NOGOTO).

The result of the BUILTIN name built-in would have the attributes FIXED
BIN(precision,scale-factor), but under RULES(ANS), FIXED BIN scale
factors must be zero. The scale factor will be set to zero.

You must recode such statements to avoid this restriction. The compiler
will ignore the scale factors in the following built-ins

    dcl (x,y) fixed bin(15,0); put list( bin(x,31,2) ); put list(
    prec(x,31,2) );

Under RULES(NOGOTO(STRICT)), there should be no GOTO statements in your
source program except for those that exit an ON-unit.

IBM1459I E Uninitialized AUTOMATIC variables in a block should not be
used in the prologue of that block.

The AUTOMATIC variables in a block may be used in the declare statements
and the executable statements

IBM1462I E Expression in comparison interpreted with DATE attribute.

In a comparison, if one comparand has the DATE attribute, the other
should also. If the non-date is an expression that could have a value
that is valid for the date pattern, it will be viewed as if it had the
same DATE attribute as the date comparand.

IBM1463I E Operand with DATE attribute is invalid except in compare or

assign. DATE attribute will be ignored.

Comparisons are the only infix operations where operands with the DATE
attribute may be used. If they are used in any other operation, the DATE
attribute will be ignored. So, in the following code, the addition will
be flagged and the DATE attribute ignored.

    dcl x char(5) date('YYDDD');

    put list( x + 1 );

If an INITIAL expression has the DATE attribute, the target should also.

IBM1468I E Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference entry
name has the DATE attribute but the corresponding parameter does not. The
DATE attribute will be ignored.

The argument and parameter should match, unlike in the example below

IBM1464I E DATE attribute ignored in comparison with non-date expression.

    dcl x entry( char(6) ); call x( date() );

IBM1469I E In a comparison, if one comparand has the DATE attribute,
the other should also. If the non-date is an expression that could not
have a value that is not valid for the date pattern, the DATE attribute
will be ignored.

IBM1465I E Source in assignment has the DATE attribute, but target
variable does not. The DATE attribute will be ignored.

Source in RETURN statement has the DATE attribute, but the corresponding
RETURNS option does not. The DATE attribute will be ignored.

The attributes of the RETURNed expression and in the RETURNS option
should match, unlike in the example below

If the target in an assignment has the DATE attribute, the source should
also. If the target is a pseudovariable, message 1466 is issued instead.

    x: proc returns( char(6) );
       ...  return( date() );

    dcl x char(6); x = date();

IBM1466I E Source in assignment has the DATE attribute, but target does
not. The DATE attribute will be ignored.

If the source in an assignment has the DATE attribute, the target
should also.

IBM1467I E Source in INITIAL clause for variable name has the DATE
attribute but the target does not.  The DATE attribute will be ignored.

IBM1470I E An ID option must be specified for the INCLUDE preprocessor.

No other options are valid for the INCLUDE preprocessor.

IBM1471I E The ID option specified for the INCLUDE preprocessor is
invalid.

The INCLUDE preprocessor ID option must have one suboption consisting
of a string specifying the INCLUDE directive.

IBM1472I E A closing right parenthesis is missing from the ID option
specified for the INCLUDE preprocessor.

The suboption specified for the INCLUDE preprocessor ID option must be
closed with a right parenthesis.

The argument and parameter should match, unlike in the example below

IBM1473I E The syntax of the preprocessor INCLUDE directive is incorrect.

    dcl x entry( char(6) date('YYMMDD') ); call x( '' );

A statement that starts with the preprocessor INCLUDE directive specified
in that preprocessor's ID option must be followed by a name and,
optionally, a semicolon.

IBM1478I E Source in RETURN statement does not have the DATE attribute,
but the corresponding RETURNS option does. The DATE attribute will
be ignored.

IBM1474I E Source in assignment does not have the DATE attribute, but
target variable does. The DATE attribute will be ignored.

If the target in an assignment has the DATE attribute, the source should
also. If the target is a pseudovariable, message 1475 is issued instead.

The attributes of the RETURNed expression and in the RETURNS option
should match, unlike in the example below

    x: proc returns( char(6) date('YYMMDD') );
       ...  return( '' );

    dcl x char(6) date('YYMMDD'); x = '';

IBM1479I E IBM1475I E

Target in assignment has the DATE attribute, but source does not. The
DATE attribute will be ignored.

Multiple RETURN statements are not allowed under RULES(NOMULTIEXIT).

Under RULES(NOMULTIEEXIT), there should be at most one RETURN statement
in each PROCEDURE and BEGIN block in your source program.

If the target in an assignment has the DATE attribute, the source
should also.

IBM1480I E IBM1476I E

Source in INITIAL clause for variable name does not have the DATE
attribute but the target does.  The DATE attribute will be ignored.

Multiple closure of groups is not allowed under RULES(NOMULTICLOSE).

If a variable has the DATE attribute, then any INITIAL value for it
should also.

IBM1477I E Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference entry
name does not have the DATE attribute but the corresponding parameter
does. The DATE attribute will be ignored.

Under RULES(NOMULTICLOSE), there should be no multiple closure of groups
in your source program.

IBM1481I E BYNAME assignment statements are not allowed under
RULES(NOBYNAME).

Under RULES(NOBYNAME), there should be no BYNAME assignment statements
in your source program.

IBM1482I E RULES(NOLAXDCL) violation: the variable variable name is
declared without any data attributes.

It will be given the default attributes, but this may be because of an
error in the declare. For instance, in the following example, parentheses
may be missing.  Under RULES(LAXDCL), this is a W-level message.

   dcl a, b fixed bin;

IBM1483I E RULES(NOLAXDCL) violation: the structure member variable name
is declared without any data attributes. A level number may be incorrect.

It will be given the default attributes, but this may be because of an
error in the declare. For instance, in the following example, the level
number on c and d should probably be 3. Under RULES(LAXDCL), this is a
W-level message.

   dcl a, b fixed bin;
     1 a,
       2 b,
         2 c, 2 d;

IBM1484I E RULES(NOLAXDCL) violation: an unnamed structure member is
declared without any data attributes. A level number may be incorrect.

inserted in an attempt to fix the problem.

The compiler assumes that an END statement to close the open DO group is
missing, but it may be that a SELECT statement to start a nested SELECT is
missing.  In either case, the code is incorrect and should be corrected.

IBM1486I E Statement contains a mismatching number of ( and ).

Every ( should have a matching ).

IBM1487I E Statement contains a mismatching number of (: and :).

Every (: should have a matching :).

IBM1488I E Specification of an alternate DD for SYSIN after the source
has been opened will be ignored.

Do not specify an alternate DD for SYSIN in a *PROCESS statement.

IBM2400I E Compiler backend issued error messages to STDOUT.

Look in STDOUT to see the message issued by the compiler backend.

It will be given the default attributes, but this may be because of an
error in the declare. For instance, in the following example, the level
number on c and d should probably be 3. Under RULES(LAXDCL), this is a
W-level message.

IBM2401I E RULES(NOLAXPUNC) violation: missing character assumed before
character. DECLARE and other nonexecutable statements should not have
labels.

   dcl a, b fixed bin;
     1 a,
       2 *,
         2 c, 2 d;

IBM1485I E A WHEN or OTHERWISE clause has been found inside of an open
DO group contained in an open SELECT group. An END statement may be
missing and will be

The indicated character is missing and has been inserted by the parser
in order to correct your source.  Under RULES(LAXPUNC), a message with
the same text, but lesser severity would be issued

     xx: dcl test fixed bin;

IBM2402I E variable name is declared as BASED on the ADDR of variable
name, but variable name requires more storage than variable name.

In DEFAULT statements, numeric precisions should be specified only inside
VALUE clauses.

The amount of storage needed for a BASED variable must be no more than
provided by its base variable.

    dft range(*) fixed bin(31);

IBM2407I E Length outside VALUE clause will be ignored.

    dcl a char(10);

    dcl b char(15) based(addr(a));

IBM2403I E PROCESS statements are not permitted under the NOPROCESS
option.

When the NOPROCESS option is in effect, the source should contain no
PROCESS statements.

IBM2404I E variable name is declared as BASED on the ADDR of variable
name, but variable name requires more storage than remains in the
enclosing level 1 structure variable name after the location of variable
name.

In DEFAULT statements, lengths of strings should be specified only inside
VALUE clauses.

    dft range(*) bit(8);

IBM2408I E AREA size outside VALUE clause will be ignored.

In DEFAULT statements, sizes of AREAs should be specified only inside
VALUE clauses.

    dft range(*) area(10000);

IBM2409I E The amount of storage needed for a BASED variable must be no
more than provided by its base variable.

RETURN statement without an expression is invalid inside a nested
PROCEDURE that specified the RETURNS attribute.

    dcl 1 a, 2 a1 char(10), 2 a2 char(10);

    dcl b char(15) based(addr(a2));

IBM2405I E Even decimal precisions are not allowed under RULES(NOEVENDEC).

All RETURN statements inside functions must specify a value to be
returned.

    a: proc returns( fixed bin );

      return;

Under RULES(NOEVENDEC), there should be no FIXED DECIMAL data declared
with an even precision.

IBM2410I E Function function name contains no valid RETURN statement.

    dcl a fixed dec(10);

Functions must contain at least one RETURN statement.

IBM2406I E Precision outside VALUE clause will be ignored.

IBM2411I E STRINGOFGRAPHIC( CHARACTER ) option is ignored because argument
to STRING built-in

function is possibly not contiguous.

The STRINGOFGRAPHIC( CHARACTER ) option will be ignored if the
argument contains any elements that are VARYING or if the argument is
a NONCONNECTED slice of an array.

IBM2412I E PROCEDURE has no RETURNS attribute, but contains a RETURN
statement. A RETURNS attribute will be assumed.

If a procedure contains a RETURN statement, it should have the RETURNS
attribute specified on its PROCEDURE statement.

    a: proc;
      return( 0 );
    end;

IBM2413I E The attribute attribute should be specified only on parameters
and descriptors.

Attributes must be consistent.

     dcl a fixed based connected;

IBM2414I E The option option conflicts with the option option. The option
option will be used instead.

The specified options conflict and cannot be used together. The compiler
will produce this message for various conflicts. For example, on ASCII
systems, the compiler will produce this message if you specify the
GRAPHIC and EBCDIC options. Conversely, on EBCDIC systems, the compiler
will produce this message if you specify the GRAPHIC and ASCII options.

IBM2415I E Without APAR number, compiler would generate incorrect code
for this statement.

The indicated APAR will fix a compiler problem with this statement.

IBM2416I E The SEPARATE suboption of TEST is not supported when the
LINEDIR option is in effect.

When the LINEDIR option is in effect, only the NOSEPARATE suboption of
the TEST option is supported.

IBM2417I E In FETCHABLE code compiled with NORENT NOWRITABLE(PRV),
it is invalid to ALLOCATE or FREE a CONTROLLED variable unless it is
a PARAMETER.

In FETCHABLE code, all CONTROLLED variables should be parameters.

IBM2418I E Variable variable is unreferenced.

The compiler will issue this message for any level-1 variable that is
not referenced in a particular storage class named in the RULES option:
for example, AUTOMATIC variables under RULES(NOUNREF), BASED variables
under RULES(NOUNREFBASED), etc

IBM2419I E option is invalid and ignored unless the ARCH option is level
or greater.

The RTCHECK option will be ignored unless the ARCH option is 8 or greater
since the necessary instructions are available only with ARCH(8) or later.

IBM2420I E DFP is invalid and ignored unless the ARCH option is 7
or greater.

The FLOAT(DFP) option will be ignored unless the ARCH option is 7 or
greater since the necessary instructions are available only with ARCH(7)
or later.

IBM2421I E A file should not be closed in its ENDFILE block.

In an ENDFILE block for a file, it is invalid to close that file in the
ENDFILE block.

IBM2422I E Under the DFP option, the HEXADEC attribute is not supported
for FLOAT DEC.

Under the FLOAT(DFP) option, all FLOAT DECIMAL will be treated as DFP
and may not be declared as HEXADEC. The attribute is still valid for
FLOAT BIN.

IBM2423I E Under the DFP option, the IEEE attribute is not supported
for FLOAT DEC.

IBM2427I E Maximum nesting of IF statements has been exceeded.

The nesting of IF statements has exceeded the value specified in the IF
suboption of the MAXNEST compiler option.

IBM2428I E Maximum nesting of PROC and BEGIN statements has been exceeded.

The nesting of PROC and BEGIN statements has exceeded the value specified
in the BLOCK suboption of the MAXNEST compiler option.

IBM2429I E Under the FLOAT(DFP) option, all FLOAT DECIMAL will be treated
as DFP and may not be declared as IEEE.  The attribute is still valid
for FLOAT BIN.

CMPAT(V3) requires that 8-byte integers be allowed. The second value in
the FIXEDBIN suboption of the LIMITS option will be set to 63.

IBM2424I E Scale factors are not allowed in FLOAT declarations.

Scale factors are valid only in declares of FIXED BIN or FiXED DEC. The
first declaration below is invalid and should be changed to one of the
subsequent declarations.

    dcl a1 float dec(15,2);

    dcl a2 fixed dec(15,2); dcl a3 float dec(15);

IBM2425I E Statement with ELSE IF should be rewritten using SELECT.

Under RULES(NOELSEIF), the compiler will issue this message for statement
where an ELSE is immediately followed by an IF statement.

IBM2426I E Maximum nesting of DO statements has been exceeded.

The nesting of DO statements has exceeded the value specified in the DO
suboption of the MAXNEST compiler option.

The use of the CMPAT(V3) option with LIMITS(FIXEDBIN(31,31)) is not
supported. Since CMPAT(V3) will cause various built-in functions (such
as HBOUND) to return a FIXED BIN(63) result, at least the second value in
the FIXEDBIN suboption of LIMITS must be 63 (i.e. LIMITS(FIXEDBIN(31,63))
or LIMITS(FIXEDBIN(63,63)) must be in effect).

IBM2430I E The LINESIZE value specified in the OPEN of file file name
is not compatible with the RECSIZE specified in its declare.

If the file has F format and is not a PRINT file, then the LINESIZE must
be no greater than the RECSIZE. If the file has F format and is a PRINT
file, then the LINESIZE must be less than the RECSIZE. If the file has
V format and is not a PRINT file, then the LINESIZE must be no greater
than the RECSIZE-4. If the file has V format and is a PRINT file, then
the LINESIZE must be less than the RECSIZE-4.

IBM2431I E The option option conflicts with the GOFF option. NOGOFF will
be used instead.

The specified option is not permitted with the GOFF option, and the GOFF
option will be turned off so that

the compile may proceed. This applies, for example, to the NOWRITABLE(PRV)
and COMMON options.

IBM2432I E The attribute character is invalid with parameters and
is ignored.

Under RULES(NOLAXSCALE), scale factors must be no larger than the
precision,

     dcl a fixed dec(15,17);

The INITIAL attribute, for example, is invalid with parameters (since
their storage will have been allocated elsewhere).

IBM2437I E SQL preprocessor invoked more than once without INCONLY.

     dcl a fixed bin parameter initial( 0 );

IBM2433I E The attribute attribute is invalid with DEFINED and is ignored.

The INITIAL attribute, for example, is invalid with DEFINED variables
(since their storage will have been allocated elsewhere).

     dcl b char(1) initial( '' ) defined(a);

IBM2434I E RULES(NOLAXENTRY) violation: name does not specify a parameter
list.

Under RULES(NOLAXENTRY), all ENTRY declares must be prototyped. If
the ENTRY should have no parameters, it should be declared as ENTRY()
rather than as simply ENTRY.

If the SQL preprocessor is invoked more than once without INCONLY as its
suboption, then the DBRM library member created for the compile will
be empty.  It is best to invoke the SQL preprocessor either only once
or once with INCONLY as its only suboption and then only once more.

IBM2438I E STOP and EXIT statements are not allowed.

Under RULES(NOSTOP), there should be no STOP and no EXIT statements in
your source program.

IBM2439I E RULES(NOPROCENDONLY) violation: END statement for a PROCEDURE
must include the name of the PROCEDURE.

Under RULES(NOPROCENDONLY), the END statement for a PROCEDURE must not
consist of simply the END keyword and a semicolon. It must also include
the name of the PROCEDURE it is closing.

IBM2435I E RULES(NOLAXSCALE) violation: scale factor is less than 0.

IBM2440I E RULES(NOLAXQUAL) violation: structure element identifier is
not qualified with the name of its containing level 1 structure.

Under RULES(NOLAXSCALE), scale factors must be nonnegative, and the
compiler flags the statement below.

     dcl a fixed dec(15,-2);

IBM2436I E RULES(NOLAXSCALE) violation: scale factor is larger than
the precision.

Under the option RULES(NOLAXQUAL), all structure elements should be
qualified with the name of their outermost parent.

IBM2441I E RULES(NOGOTO) violation: GOTO exits the current block.

Under RULES(NOGOTO(LOOSE)) and RULES(NOGOTO(LOOSEFORWARD)), there should
be no GOTO statements in your source program except

for those that exit an ON-unit and those that goto a label in the
current block.

IBM2442I E RULES(NOPADDING) violation: structure identifier contains
padding.

If the CICS preprocessor were invoked more than once, then the second
invocation would cause duplicate declarations to be inserted in the
outermost procedure. The CICS preprocessor must be invoked only once. The
compiler ignores any excess invocations.

Under RULES(NOPADDING), structures should contain no padding.

IBM2449I E IBM2443I E

RULES(NOGLOBALDO) violation: control variable in DO statement belongs
to a parent block.

RULES(NOSELFASSIGN) violation: source and target in assignment are
identical.

Under RULES(NOGLOBALDO), in a DO loop of the form DO x = .., x must be
declared in the same block as the DO loop.

IBM2444I E The built-in function builtin has been deprecated.

Under RULES(NOSELFASSIGN), the source and target in an assignment must
be different.

IBM2450I E First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function should have
length greater than or equal to length.

The named built-in function was specified in the BUILTIN suboption of
the DEPRECATE option, and so any explicit or contextual declaration of
it is flagged.

The argument to the named built-in function is too short. For example,
the argument to the Y4DATE built-in function should have the form YYMMDD
with possibly some trailing blanks, and hence the length of that argument
should be greater than or equal to 6.

IBM2445I E The INCLUDE file filename has been deprecated.

IBM2451I E RULES(NOLAXIF) violation: source in the assignment is a
Boolean, but the target is not BIT(1).

The named INCLUDE file was specified in the INCLUDE suboption of the
DEPRECATE option, and so any attempt to include it is flagged.

IBM2446I E The ENTRY named variable has been deprecated.

Under RULES(NOLAXIF), if the target in an assignment is not BIT(1),
the assignment is flagged if the source is a Boolean. So, for example,
the first assignment below is correct, but RULES(NOLAXIF) flags the
second assignment since the third assignment might be what was intended.

The named ENTRY was specified in the ENTRY suboption of the DEPRECATE
option, and so any explicit or contextual declaration of it is flagged.

IBM2447I E The VARIABLE named variable has been deprecated.

     x = (y = z);

     x = y = z;

     x, y = z;

The named VARIABLE was specified in the VARIABLE suboption of the
DEPRECATE option, and so any explicit or contextual declaration of it
is flagged.

IBM2448I E CICS preprocessor invoked more than once.

IBM2452I E RULES(NOLAXSCALE) violation: scale factor is less than 0.

Under RULES(NOLAXSCALE), scale factors must be nonnegative. The compiler
flags the first statement below, but not the second one (which is a
possible replacement for the first).

     b = round( c, -1 );

     b = 10 * round( c/ 10, 0 );

IBM2453I E RULES(NOLAXNESTED) violation: code should come in one group
of statements with no intervening procedures or BEGIN blocks.

Under RULES(NOLAXNESTED), all executable code in a procedure must come
in one group of statements with all nested subprocedures and nested
BEGIN blocks surrounding that group of statements.

IBM2454I E The builtin statement has been deprecated.

The named statement was specified in the STMT suboption of the DEPRECATE
option, and so any use of that statement is flagged.

IBM2455I E The builtin keyword does not conform to the CASERULES option.

The named keyword does not follow the case rules specified in the KEYWORD
suboption of the CASERULES option.

IBM2456I E RULES(NORECURSIVE) violation: RECURSIVE PROCEDUREs are not
allowed under RULES(NORECURSIVE).

Under RULES(NORECURSIVE), the RECURSIVE attribute should not be used
and procedures should not call themselves.

IBM2457I E RULES(NORECURSIVE) conflicts with DFT(RECURSIVE). The compiler
will apply RULES(RECURSIVE) instead.

If you want to use DFT(RECURSIVE), then RULES(RECURSIVE) should also be
used. If RULES(NORECURSIVE) is more important, then DFT(NONRECURSIVE)
should be used.

IBM2458I E The CONTROLLED attribute is not allowed under
RULES(NOCONTROLLED).

Under RULES(NOCONTROLLED), the CONTROLLED attribute must not be used.

IBM2459I E The characters specified in the option option must all have
hexadecimal values less than 80.

Under the ENCODING(UTF8) option, the characters specified in the OR, NOT,
QUOTE, and BLANK compiler options must all be one-byte UTF-8 characters.

IBM2460I E The option option conflicts with the ENCODING(UTF8)
option. ENCODING(ASCII) will be assumed.

The specified options conflict and cannot be used together. The
ENCODING(UTF8) option cannot be used with the SOSI, DBCS or GRAPHIC
options.

IBM2461I E The MARGINI option must specify a valid UTF-8 string consisting
of one UTF-8 character.

Under the ENCODING(UTF8) option, the MARGINI option must be a
one-character UTF-8 string. If not, a blank will be used instead.

IBM2462I E The attribute character conflicts with the attribute character
and is ignored.

Attributes must be consistent.

     dcl a parameter static;

IBM2463I E LINKAGE(SYSTEM) is not supported for PL/I PROCEDUREs, and
LINKAGE(OPTLINK) will be assumed instead.

Under 64-bit, only the OPTLINK linkage is supported for PL/I procedures

Under RULES(NOYY), the use of any of the Y4 date built-in functions
is invalid.

IBM2464I E RULES(NOLAXSTMT) violation: line contains more than one
statement.

IBM2471I E RULES(NOYY) conflicts with use of the BUILTIN name built-in
function with a window argument.

Under RULES(NOLAXSTMT), there should be only one statement per line.

IBM2465I E Assignment of a null string to a pointer is invalid.

Under DEFAULT(NULLSTRPTR(STRICT)), such assignments are invalid.

IBM2466I E Comparison of a null string to a pointer is invalid.

Under RULES(NOYY), the use of any date built-in function with a window
argument is invalid.

IBM2472I E RULES(NOYY) conflicts with use of the DATE built-in function.

Under RULES(NOYY), the use of the DATE built-in functions is invalid
since it will return a 2-digit year.

IBM2473I E RULES(NOLAXINTERFACE) violation: proc name has not been
explicitly declared.

Under DEFAULT(NULLSTRPTR(STRICT)), such comparisons are invalid.

IBM2467I E RULES(NOYY) conflicts with use of a date pattern with a
2-digit year.

Under RULES(NOYY), the use of date patterns with a 2-digit year is
invalid.

IBM2468I E RULES(NOYY) conflicts with use of a date pattern with a ZY.

Under RULES(NOYY), the use of date patterns with a ZY is invalid.

IBM2469I E RULES(NOYY) conflicts with use of the DATE attribute without
a pattern.

Under RULES(NOLAXINTERFACE), if there is a PACKAGE statement, then every
external PROCEDURE other than MAIN must be declared.

IBM2474I E RULES(NOGOTO) violation: GOTO jumps to a previous line in
the current block.

Under RULES(NOGOTO(LOOSEFORWARD)), there should be no GOTO statements
in your source program except for those that exit an ON-unit and those
that goto a label on a later line in the current block.

IBM2475I E RULES(NOMULTISEMI) violation: line contains too many
semicolons.

Under RULES(NOMULTISEMI), there should be only one semicolon on a line.

Under RULES(NOYY), the use of the DATE attribute without a pattern is
invalid since it implies a pattern of YYMMDD.

IBM2476I E Item in OPTIONS list is invalid for ON-unit BEGIN
blocks. option- name is ignored.

IBM2470I E RULES(NOYY) conflicts with use of the BUILTIN name built-in
function.

The indicated element of the options list is invalid for ON-unit BEGIN
blocks (although it may be valid for other BEGIN blocks).

    on zdiv begin options( inline );

IBM2478I E Under RULES(NOCOMPLEX), the COMPLEX attribute, the COMPLEX
built-in function, and constants ending with the I suffix are not allowed.

Under RULES(NOCOMPLEX), the COMPLEX attributes, the COMPLEX built-in
function, and "imaginary" constants (such as 1i) must not be used.

IBM2479I E RULES(NOLAXPACKAGE) violation: compilation unit does not
contain a PACKAGE statement.

If the RULES(NOLAXPARMS) option is in effect, The compiler will issue
this message for any level-1 paramter declared without specifying if it
is an input, an output or both.

IBM2483I E RULES(NOPADDING) violation: the structure identifier is
count-byte aligned, but does not have a multiple of count bytes before
its first element with that alignment.

Under RULES(NOPADDING(STRICT)), structures should contain no hang.

IBM2484I E RULES(NOPADDING) violation: the structure identifier does
not have a multiple of 8 bits before its first element with byte (or
greater) alignment.

Under RULES(NOLAXPACKAGE), every compilation unti must contain a PACKAGE
statement.

IBM2480I E RULES(NOLAXEXPORTS) violation: package contains PROCEDUREs
but no EXPORTS clause naming specifically which PROCEDUREs are exported.

Under RULES(NOPADDING(STRICT)), structures should contain no hang.

IBM2485I E RULES(NOPADDING) violation: the size of the structure
identifier is not a multiple of its alignment.

Under RULES(NOLAXEXPORTS), every PACKAGE that contains procedures must
have an EXPORTS clause that names the routines it exports.

Under RULES(NOPADDING(STRICT)), structures should contain no padding.

IBM2481I E RULES(NOLAXSCALE) violation: scale factor is greater than 0.

IBM2486I E RULES(NOPADDING) violation: the structure identifier does not
have a multiple of 8 bits after its last element with byte (or greater)
alignment.

Under RULES(NOLAXSCALE(STRICT)), scale factors for FIXED BIN must be
zero. The compiler uses other messages to flag negative scale factors
and scale factors greater than the precision, but it uses this message
to flag all other positive scale factors such as in the statement below.

     dcl a fixed bin(15,2);

IBM2482I E RULES(NOLAXPARMS) violation: Parameter variable is declared
without INONLY, OUTONLY, or INOUT.

Under RULES(NOPADDING(STRICT)), structures should contain no hang.

IBM2487I E RULES(NOPADDING) violation: the structure identifier does
not contain a multiple of 8 bits.

Under RULES(NOPADDING(STRICT)), structures should contain no hang.

IBM2489I E RULES(NOLAXSCALE) violation: FIXED DEC(source-
precision,source-scale) operand

will be converted to FIXED BIN(target-precision,target-scale).
This introduces a non-zero scale factor into an integer operation
and will produce a result with the attributes FIXED BIN(result-
precision,result-scale).

Under RULES(IBM), when an arithmetic operation has an operand that
is FIXED BIN and an operand that is FIXED DEC with a non-zero scale
factor, then the FIXED DEC operand will be converted to FIXED BIN.
Under RULES(NOLAXSCALE(STRICT)), this is flagged as an error.

IBM2494I E RULES(NOLAXQUAL) violation: Structure element identifier is
not fully qualified.

Under the option RULES(NOLAXQUAL(FULL)), all structure elements should
be qualified with the names of all their parents.

IBM2495I E Third argument in BUILTIN name reference is too small. It
will be replaced by the value of the second argument minus 1.

IBM2490I E Source in assignment does not fit in the the VALUERANGE of
the target.

Given SUBTO(x,i,j), then j >= (i-1) must be true.  Otherwise the
STRINGRANGE condition would be raised.

When assigning to a target with the VALUERANGE attribute, the source
must have a value in that range.

IBM2496I E The JSON( ENCODING( option ) ) option conflicts with the
CODEPAGE( option ) option. The JSON( ENCODING( option ) ) option will
be used instead.

IBM2491I E Source in assignment does not occur in the the VALUELIST of
the target.

The specified options conflict and cannot be used together. The codepage
values in this pair must specify the codepages 37 and 1047.

When assigning to a target with the VALUELIST attribute, the source must
have a value in that list.

IBM2499I E IBM2492I E

RULES(NOGLOBAL) violation: Variable variable is used inside a nested
PROCEDURE.

If the RULES(NOGLOBAL) option is in effect, the compiler will issue this
message for variables that are used in a procedure that is nested inside
the procedure in which they were declared.

IBM2493I E RULES(NOLAXOPTIONAL) violation: Variable variable is used
as an argument to the BUILTIN name function, but does not have the
OPTIONAL attribute.

If the RULES(NOLAXOPTIONAL) option is in effect, the compiler will
enforce the rule that arguments to the PRESENT or OMITTED built-in
functions should have the OPTIONAL attribute.

MAXRUNONIF limit exceeded: IF statement tests an expression that consists
of count comparisons of the same reference against a series of constant
values. The expression could be replaced by one INLIST reference.

It would be better to replace an IF expression of the form ( a = y1 | a =
y2 | ... | a = yn ) with the expression INLIST( a, y1, y2, ..., yn ). This
would be less likely to contain errors and more likely to be optimized.

IBM2500I E MAXRUNONIF limit exceeded: IF statement tests an expression
that consists of count comparisons of the same reference against a series
of constant values. The statement could be replaced by a SELECT statement
containing one large WHEN statement.

It would be better to replace an IF expression of the form ( a = y1 | a =
y2 | ... | a = yn ) with the expression SELECT( a ); WHEN( y1, y2, ...,
yn ) ... This would be less likely to contain errors and more likely to
be optimized.

IBM2501I E Alignment value is invalid and will be ignored.

The only supported ALIGNED values are 1, 2, 4, and 8.

    dcl a char(256) aligned(32);

IBM2502I E The compiler option CMPAT specifies Voption-value but the CMPAT
suboption in the OPTIONS attribute specifies Vsuboption- value. These
values should match.

If the CMPAT compiler option specifies, for example, V2, then the CMPAT
suboption in the OPTIONS attribute on the PROCEDURE must also specify V2.

IBM2503I E RULES(NOLAXENTRY) violation: name has a parameter with the
ENTRY attribute but which does not specify a parameter list.

Under RULES(NOLAXENTRY), all ENTRY declares must be prototyped. If
the ENTRY should have no parameters, it should be declared as ENTRY()
rather than as simply ENTRY.

IBM2504I E PROCINC syntax is invalid.

%PROCINC statements must have a file name and a semicolon on the same
line as the %PROCINC keyword.

IBM2505I E PROCINC files must include only PROCESS and PROCINC statements.

%PROCINC files must not contain any blank lines or any code.

IBM2506I E Only LIMITED ENTRY may be passed BYVALUE. All other ENTRY
must be passed BYADDR.

Unless an ENTRY has the LIMITED attribute, it must be passed BYADDR.

IBM2507I E The result of the BUILTIN name built-in would have the
attributes FIXED base name(precision,scale- factor), but FIXED base name
scale factors should be nonnegative.  The scale factor will be adjusted
to fit.

You should recode such statements to avoid this.  Support for negative
scale factors is deprecated and may be withdrawn in the future.

IBM2508I E In FIXED(p,q) declares q should be nonnegative.

Support for FIXED declares with a negative scale factor is deprecated
and may be withdrawn in the future.

IBM2509I E The rounding digit scale-factor specified in the BUILTIN
name built-in function is too large: it is greater than the number of
fractional digits in its attributes argument.

In ROUND(x,n), if x is FIXED(p,q), then n must be less than or equal to
q. For example, if x is FIXED BIN(p,0), then ROUND(x,1) would request
a rounding of a non- existent fractional part.

IBM2510I E In BUILTIN name of FIXED BIN(p,q), q should be greater than 0.

CEIL, FLOOR, and TRUNC of an expression x that has the attributes FIXED
BIN is somewhat meaningless except when either x has a positive scale
factor or x is a quotient (y/z) where y is unscaled FIXED BIN and z is
unscaled FIXED.

IBM2511I E The operands in a division operation have the attributes

operand attributes and operand attributes which will produce a result
with the attributes result attributes. This means that its scale factor is
negative. That may lead to the loss of significant digits and unexpected
results. You may be able to avoid this problem by changing the scale
factor of the divisor (for example, if the divisor is the constant 100.0,
by changing

it to 100) or by using the DIVIDE built-in function.

This message can occur in a divide of x by y if the scale factor of y is
greater than the scale factor of x, for example if x has the attributes
FIXED BIN(31,0) and y is a FIXED DEC with a factional part. To eliminate
this message, the PRECISION built-in function could be used to change
the scale factor of the operands or the DIVIDE built-in function could
be used to override the default attributes for the result.

Chapter 4. Compiler Severe Messages (1500-2399)

IBM1500I S Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY
name has type source type, which is invalid for a parameter with type
target type.

An argument must have a type that can be converted to the corresponding
parameter's type.

IBM1501I S Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY
name has a different strong type than the corresponding parameter.

If a parameter is strongly typed, any argument passed to it must have
the same type.

Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY name has type
source type, which is invalid for a parameter with type target type. If
the ENTRY should be invoked, an argument list must be provided.

IBM1502I S POINTER expressions can be converted to OFFSET only if the
OFFSET is declared with an AREA qualifier.

IBM1505I S Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY
name has type POINTER, which is invalid for a POINTER parameter since the
OFFSET argument is not an OFFSET variable declared with an AREA qualifier.

OFFSET variables can be converted to POINTER only if the OFFSET is
declared with an AREA qualifier.

IBM1506I S Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY
name has a different ORDINAL type than the corresponding parameter.

ORDINALs cannot be passed to other ORDINALs having different ORDINAL
types.

IBM1507I S Arrays of label constants may not be passed as arguments.

An argument must have a type that can be converted to the corresponding
parameter's type.

IBM1503I S Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY
name has type source type, which is invalid for a parameter with type
LIMITED ENTRY.

Only an EXTERNAL ENTRY CONSTANT, an ENTRY CONSTANT representing a
non-nested PROCEDURE, or an ENTRY VARIABLE with the LIMITED attribute
can be passed to a LIMITED ENTRY parameter.

IBM1504I S Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY
name has type POINTER, which is invalid for an OFFSET parameter without
an AREA qualifier.

The array can be assigned to an array of LABEL variables, and that array
can be passed.

    lx(1): ... ;

    lx(2): ... ;

    call x( lx );

IBM1508I S Too few arguments have been specified for the ENTRY ENTRY name.

The number of arguments must match the number of parameters in the
ENTRY declaration.

IBM1509I S Argument to variable name pseudovariable must be ASSIGNABLE.

71

    call a( 0 );

The target in an assignment through a pseudovariable must not have the
NONASSIGNABLE attribute.

IBM1513I S dcl a static nonasgn char(7) init('example');

    unspec(a) = ''b;

IBM1510I S First argument to variable name pseudovariable must be
ASSIGNABLE.

The target in an assignment through a pseudovariable must not have the
NONASSIGNABLE attribute.

    dcl a static nonasgn char(7)
init('example');

    substr(a,1,2) = 'tr';

IBM1511I S Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY
name is an aggregate, but the parameter description specifies a scalar.

Scalars cannot be converted to aggregates.

    dcl a entry( fixed bin ), b(10) fixed bin;

    call a( b );

Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY name is
an aggregate that does not exactly match the corresponding parameter
description.

Dummy aggregate arguments are not supported.  If an entry description
describes an aggregate parameter, then any argument passed must match
that parameter's description.

IBM1514I S Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY
name is an aggregate with more members than its corresponding parameter
description.

Dummy aggregate arguments are not supported.  If an entry description
describes an aggregate parameter, then any argument passed must match
that parameter's description.

IBM1515I S Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY
name is an aggregate with fewer members than its corresponding parameter
description.

Dummy aggregate arguments are not supported.  If an entry description
describes an aggregate parameter, then any argument passed must match
that parameter's description.

IBM1512I S Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY
name is a scalar, but the parameter description specifies an aggregate
to which it cannot be passed.

IBM1516I S The number of dimensions in the subelements of argument number
argument-number in ENTRY reference ENTRY name and in its corresponding
parameter description do not match.

Dummy aggregate arguments are not supported except when passing a non-AREA
scalar to a non- CONTROLLED array of scalars, and the array must have
no bounds specified as *. The scalar can be assigned to an aggregate,
and that aggregate can be passed.

    dcl a entry( 1, 2 fixed bin, 2 fixed bin );

Dummy aggregate arguments are not supported.  If an entry description
describes an aggregate parameter, then any argument passed must match
that parameter's description.

IBM1517I S The upper and lower bounds in the subelements of argument
number argument-number in

ENTRY reference ENTRY name and in its corresponding parameter description
do not match.

Dummy aggregate arguments are not supported.  If an entry description
describes an aggregate parameter, then any argument passed must match
that parameter's description.

IBM1518I S The number of dimensions for argument number argument-
number in ENTRY reference ENTRY name and in its corresponding parameter
description do not match.

The compilation requires more virtual memory than is available. It may
help to specify one or more of the following compiler options: NOTEST,
NOXREF, NOATTRIBUTES, and NOAGGREGATE.

IBM1522I S variable cannot be SET unless an IN clause is specified.

If an offset variable is declared without an AREA reference, it cannot
be set in an ALLOCATE or LOCATE statement unless an IN clause names an
AREA reference.

IBM1523I S Argument to BUILTIN name built- in function must be an AREA
reference.

Array arguments and parameters must have the same number of dimensions.

    dcl a entry( (*,*) fixed bin ), b (10)
fixed bin;

    call a( b );

The built-in function AVAILABLEAREA is defined only for AREAs.

IBM1524I S BUILTIN name(x) is undefined if ABS(x) > 1.

IBM1519I S The upper and lower bounds for argument number argument-
number in ENTRY reference ENTRY name and in its corresponding parameter
description do not match.

An expression contains the built-in function ASIN or ACOS applied to a
restricted expression that evaluated to a number outside the domain of
that function.

IBM1525I S ATANH(x) is undefined if x is REAL and ABS(x) >= 1.

Array arguments and parameters must have the same lower and upper bounds.

An expression contains the built-in function ATANH applied to a restricted
expression that evaluated to a number outside the domain of that function.

    dcl a entry( (0:10) fixed bin ), b (10)
fixed bin;

IBM1526I S Argument to BUILTIN name must have derived mode REAL.

    call a( b );

IBM1520I S Charset 48 is not supported.

Charset 48 is no longer supported. The source code must be converted to
charset 60.

IBM1521I S Not enough virtual memory is available to continue the
compilation.

An expression contains the named built-in function with an argument
having mode COMPLEX.

IBM1527I S First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
locator type.

An expression contains the named built-in function with its first argument
having neither type POINTER nor OFFSET.

IBM1528I S First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
derived mode REAL.

An expression contains the named built-in function with its first argument
having mode COMPLEX. This message applies, for example, to the ATAN and
ATAND built-in functions when two arguments are given.

IBM1530I S Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
derived mode REAL.

An expression contains the named built-in function, with its second
argument having mode COMPLEX. This message applies, for example, to the
ATAN and ATAND built-in functions when two arguments are given.

IBM1531I S BUILTIN name argument has invalid type.

An expression contains the reference BINARYVALUE(x) where x has a type
other than POINTER, OFFSET or ORDINAL.

IBM1532I S E35 sort exit routines must use a 32-bit linkage.

Any other linkage is invalid.

IBM1533I S BUILTIN name argument must have computational type.

An expression contains the named built-in function with an argument that
has neither string nor numeric type.

IBM1534I S BUILTIN name result would be too long.

An expression contains the named built-in function with an argument
having type other than REAL FLOAT.  This message applies, for instance,
to the floating- point inquiry built-in functions such as HUGE and RADIX,
and to the floating-point manipulation built-in functions such as EXPONENT
and SUCC.

IBM1536I S BUILTIN name argument must be a reference.

An expression contains the named built-in function with an argument that
is not a reference.

IBM1537I S BUILTIN name argument must be an array expression.

An expression contains the named built-in function with an argument
that is not an array expression. This message applies, for example,
to the built-in functions ALL, ANY, SUM and PROD.

IBM1538I S BUILTIN name argument must be a FILE reference.

An expression contains the named built-in function with an argument that
is not a FILE. This message applies, for example, to the I/O built-in
functions such as LINENO and PAGENO.

IBM1539I S * is invalid as a built-in function argument.

A value must be specified as an argument to a BUILTIN function unless
the argument is optional.

    dcl a float;

    a = sqrt(*);

IBM1540I S The result of the REPEAT or COPY built-in function must not
be longer than the maximum allowed for the base string type.

IBM1535I S BUILTIN name argument must have type REAL FLOAT.

Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built-in function must
have derived mode REAL.

An expression contains the named built-in function with the specified
argument having mode COMPLEX.

This message applies to the MAX and MIN built-in functions.

IBM1548I S BUILTIN function may not be used inside a BEGIN block.

IBM1541I S Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built-in
function must have computational type.

An expression contains the named built-in function with the specified
argument having noncomputational type. This message applies to the MAX
and MIN built- in functions.

IBM1542I S First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
computational type.

An expression contains the named built-in function with a first argument
that has neither string nor numeric type.

IBM1543I S Argument to BUILTIN name built- in function must have type
CHARACTER(1) NONVARYING.

The PLISTSIZE built-in functions may be used only in procedures.

IBM1549I S BUILTIN function may be used only in PROCEDUREs with
LINKAGE(SYSTEM).

The PLISTSIZE built-in function may not be used in procedures with any
of the linkages OPTLINK, PASCAL, etc.

IBM1550I S Argument to the BUILTIN name pseudovariable must be an EVENT
variable.

This message applies to the COMPLETION and STATUS pseudovariables.

IBM1551I S Argument to the BUILTIN name pseudovariable must be a TASK
variable.

This applies to the RANK built-in function.

IBM1545I S First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must be
an array.

This message applies to the PRIORITY pseudovariable.

An expression contains the named built-in function with a first
argument that is not an array. This message applies, for instance,
to the DIMENSION, HBOUND, and LBOUND built-in functions.

IBM1546I S Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
type CHARACTER(1) NONVARYING.

IBM1552I S Third argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
computational type.

An expression contains the named built-in function with a third argument
that has neither string nor numeric type. This message applies, for
example, to the SUBSTR and CENTER built-in functions.

IBM1554I S This applies to the PLIFILL built-in subroutine.

IBM1547I S Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
computational type.

Argument to BUILTIN name built- in function must be either a NONVARYING
BIT array reference or else an array expression with known length.

An expression contains the named built-in function with a second argument
that has neither string nor numeric type.

The ALL and ANY built-in functions are restricted to two types of array
expressions: an array expression that is a NONVARYING BIT array reference
or an array expression that has known length. The first

five examples below meet these restrictions, but the remaining examples
do not.

    dcl a(10) bit(16) varying; dcl b(10) bit(16);

    if all( b ) then ...  if any( a <> ''b ) then ...  if all( a = b &
    a ) then ...  if any( ''b <> b ) then ...  if all( a = ''b | b =
    ''b ) then ...  if any( a ) then ...  if all( substr(b,1,n) ) then ...

IBM1555I S Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
computational type.

An expression contains the named built-in function with a second argument
that has neither string nor numeric type.

IBM1556I S Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built-in
function would force STRINGRANGE.

If a third argument is given for one of the built-in functions INDEX,
SEARCH, VERIFYR, or SCRUBOUT, it must be positive. If a third argument
is given for one of the built-in functions SEARCHR and VERIFYR, it must
be nonnegative. If a fourth argument is given for the built-in function
REPLACE, it must be positive.

IBM1557I S Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must be
positive.

The second argument for the built-in functions CENTER, LEFT and RIGHT
must not be zero or negative.

IBM1558I S Argument to VALID built-in function must have the attributes
FIXED DECIMAL or PICTURE.

The argument to the VALID built-in function must have exactly the
indicated attributes. It is not sufficient that it can be converted to
these attributes.

IBM1559I S SQRT(x) is undefined if x is REAL and negative.

An expression contains the BUILTIN function SQRT applied to a restricted
expression that evaluated to a number outside the domain of that function.

IBM1560I S BUILTIN function(x) is undefined if x is REAL and not positive.

An expression contains the named built-in function applied to a
restricted expression that evaluated to a number outside the domain of
that function. This message applies, for instance, to the LOG, LOG2,
and LOG10 built-in functions.

IBM1561I S RULES(ANS) does not allow ROUND to be applied to FIXED BIN.

RULES(ANS) dose not permit non-zero scale factors with FIXED BIN,
and hence it does not allow ROUND to be applied to FIXED BIN (or BIT)
arguments.

IBM1562I S Argument to BUILTIN name built-in function has invalid type.

The argument to the HANDLE built-in must be a structure type, and
conversely the argument to the TYPE built-in must be a handle.

IBM1563I S Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must be
nonnegative.

The second argument for the built-in functions CHARACTER, BIT, and
GRAPHIC must be zero or greater.

IBM1564I S Too few arguments have been specified for the BUILTIN name
built-in function.

Supply the minimum number of arguments required.

IBM1566I S BUILTIN name(x) is undefined for x outside the supported
domain.

An expression contains the named built-in function applied to a restricted
expression that evaluated

to a number outside the supported domain of that function.

IBM1568I S BUILTIN function(x,y) is undefined if x and y are both zero.

An expression contains the built-in function ATAN or ATAND applied to a
restricted expression that evaluated to a number outside the domain of
that function.

IBM1569I S BUILTIN name argument must be a CONNECTED reference.

The argument to the named built-in function must be a reference (for
example, not an expression or a literal), and that reference must be
CONNECTED.

IBM1570I S BUILTIN name argument must be a reference to a level 1
CONTROLLED variable.

The ALLOCATION built-in function cannot be used with structure members
or with non-CONTROLLED variables.

IBM1571I S BUILTIN name argument must be a reference to a level 1 BYADDR
parameter.

The OMITTED built-in function cannot be used with BYVALUE parameters,
structure members, or non- parameters.

IBM1573I S The use of * as an argument is permitted only for parameters
declared with the OPTIONAL attribute.

The indicated argument to built-in functions such as PLIMOVE and COMPARE
must be a locator.

IBM1576I S Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built- in
function must have type CHARACTER(1) NONVARYING.

This applies to HEXIMAGE, CENTER, LEFT, RIGHT, MEMSQUEEZE, etc.

IBM1577I S First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
type POINTER.

This applies to the OFFSET built-in function.

IBM1578I S First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
type OFFSET.

This applies to the POINTER built-in function.

IBM1579I S Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
type AREA.

This applies to the OFFSET and POINTER built-in functions.

IBM1580I S First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function is an
OFFSET value.

If the first argument to built-in functions such as PLIMOVE and COMPARE
has the attribute OFFSET, it must be an OFFSET reference not an OFFSET
value.

Add the OPTIONAL attribute to the entry declaration or replace the *
by an actual argument.

IBM1581I S IBM1575I S

Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built-in function must
have type POINTER or OFFSET.

First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function is an OFFSET variable
declared without an AREA qualifier.

If the first argument to built-in functions such as PLIMOVE and COMPARE
is an OFFSET variable, that OFFSET variable must be declared with an AREA

qualifier so that the offset can be converted to an address.

IBM1582I S Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built-in
function is an OFFSET value.

If the indicated argument to built-in functions such as PLIMOVE and
COMPARE has the attribute OFFSET, it must be an OFFSET reference not an
OFFSET value.

IBM1583I S Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built- in
function is an OFFSET variable declared without an AREA qualifier.

If the indicated argument to built-in functions such as PLIMOVE and
COMPARE is an OFFSET variable, that OFFSET variable must be declared
with an AREA qualifier so that the offset can be converted to an address.

IBM1584I S Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
type OFFSET.

Any other argument type is invalid. This message applies to the PLISRTx
built-in functions.

IBM1588I S First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
type GRAPHIC.

This applies to the CHARGRAPHIC built-in function.  For instance, in
the following example, g should be declared as graphic, not as char.

    dcl c char(10); dcl g char(5);

    c = charg( g );

IBM1589I S BUILTIN name argument must not have any subscripts.

The LOCATION and BITLOCATION built-in functions cannot be applied to
subscripted references.

IBM1590I S Argument to the STRING built-in function must not be a UNION
and must not contain a UNION.

This applies to the OFFSETDIFF built-in function.

IBM1585I S Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
type POINTER.

This applies to the POINTERDIFF built-in function.

The STRING built-in function and pseudovariable cannot be applied to
UNIONs or to structures containing UNIONs.

IBM1591I S All members of an argument to the STRING built-in function
must have the UNALIGNED attribute.

IBM1586I S Argument to the STRING built-in function must be CONNECTED.

The STRING built-in function and pseudovariable cannot be applied to
discontiguous array cross- sections or to array parameters not declared
with the CONNECTED attribute.

IBM1587I S Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built-in
function must have the ENTRY attribute.

The STRING built-in function and pseudovariable cannot be applied to
structures or arrays containing elements with the ALIGNED attribute.

IBM1592I S All members of an argument to the STRING built-in function
must have the NONVARYING attribute.

The STRING built-in function and pseudovariable cannot be applied to
structures or arrays containing VARYING strings.

IBM1593I S All members of an argument to the STRING built-in function
must have string type.

The STRING built-in function and pseudovariable cannot be applied to
structures or arrays containing noncomputational types or arithmetic
types other than pictures.

IBM1594I S All members of an argument to the STRING built-in function
must have the same string type.

The STRING built-in function and pseudovariable cannot be applied to
structures or arrays containing different string types, for example,
BIT and CHARACTER strings.

IBM1595I S First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
type REAL FLOAT.

This applies to the floating-point inquiry and manipulation built-in
functions such as HUGE and EXPONENT.

IBM1596I S Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
type CHARACTER.

This applies to the EDIT built-in function.

IBM1597I S BUILTIN name argument must have type TASK.

The named built-in function is not a pseudovariable and may not be used
as one.

IBM1600I S Source to BUILTIN name pseudovariable must be scalar.

It is invalid to assign an array, structure, or union to one of the
built-in functions ONCHAR, ONSOURCE, or ONGSOURCE.

IBM1601I S The identifier identifier is not the name of a built-in
function. Any use of it is unsupported.

The BUILTIN attribute can be applied only to identifiers that are the
names of built-in functions or subroutines.

IBM1602I S Fourth argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
the attributes REAL FIXED BIN(31,0).

This applies to the PLISRTx built-in functions. For instance, in the
following example, rc should be declared as fixed bin(31), not fixed
bin(15).

    dcl rc fixed bin(15);

    call plisrta( 'SORT FIELDS=(1,80,CH,A) ',
                  'RECORD  TYPE=F,LENGTH=(80) ', 256000, rc );

IBM1603I S BUILTIN name argument must not have the CONSTANT attribute.

This applies to the PRIORITY built-in function.

IBM1598I S BUILTIN name argument must have type EVENT.

This applies to the COMPLETION and STATUS built-in functions.

IBM1599I S The built-in function variable name may not be used as a
pseudovariable.

This applies to the ADDR and similar built-in functions.  It is invalid,
for instance, to apply the ADDR built-in function to a label constant.

IBM1604I S BUILTIN function argument must be nonnegative.

The argument for the built-in functions LOW and HIGH must be zero
or greater.

IBM1605I S Argument to ENTRYADDR built- in function must be an ENTRY

variable or an EXTERNAL ENTRY constant.

IBM1611I S First argument to BUILTIN name pseudovariable must have
string type.

The ENTRYADDR built-in function cannot be applied to non-ENTRYs or to
INTERNAL ENTRY constants.

IBM1606I S Argument to variable name pseudovariable must be a reference.

The SUBSTR pseudovariable cannot be applied to numeric variables or to
noncomputational values.

IBM1612I S Argument to the ENTRYADDR pseudovariable must be an ENTRY
variable.

Pseudovariables cannot be applied to expressions.

    unspec( 12 ) = '00'b4;

IBM1607I S First argument to variable name pseudovariable must be
a reference.

The SUBSTR pseudovariable cannot be applied to expressions.

    substr( 'nope', 1, 1 ) = 'd';

IBM1608I S Argument to variable name pseudovariable must be a scalar.

The compiler does not support the named pseudovariable applied to arrays,
structures, or unions.

IBM1609I S First argument to variable name pseudovariable must be
a scalar.

The compiler does not support the named pseudovariable applied to arrays,
structures, or unions.

IBM1610I S Argument to variable name pseudovariable must be COMPLEX.

The REAL and IMAG pseudovariable can be applied only to COMPLEX arithmetic
variables.

The ENTRYADDR pseudovariable can be applied only to ENTRY variables.

IBM1613I S Argument to BUILTIN name built- in function has attributes
that conflict with file attribute.

The indicated built-in function cannot be applied to file constants with
attributes that conflict with the indicated attribute.

IBM1614I S Argument to BUILTIN name built- in function has attributes
that conflict with STREAM.

The indicated built-in function cannot be applied to non-STREAM files.

IBM1615I S Argument to BUILTIN name built- in function has attributes
that conflict with PRINT.

The indicated built-in function cannot be applied to non-PRINT files.

IBM1616I S Attributes and ENVIRONMENT options for file file name conflict.

Specified file attributes and ENVIRONMENT options on a declaration
statement are in conflict. The following DECLARE statement is an example
of this type of conflict:

  dcl file f1 direct env(consecutive);

IBM1617I S DIRECT attribute for file file name needs ENVIRONMENT option
specification of INDEXED, REGIONAL, RELATIVE, or VSAM.

Use of the DIRECT file attribute needs an ENVIRONMENT option specification
of INDEXED, REGIONAL, RELATIVE, or VSAM.

IBM1623I S The dot-qualified reference reference name is unknown.

The named reference is not a member of any structure or union declared in
the block in which it is referenced or declared in any block containing
that block.

IBM1625I S Extent must be a scalar.

  dcl file f1 direct env(relative);

IBM1618I S Syntax of the INCLUDE statement is incorrect.

%INCLUDE must be followed by a name and either a semicolon or else a
second name in parenthesis and then a semicolon.

IBM1619I S File specification after INCLUDE is too long.

An expression specifying an array bound, a string length or an AREA size
must not be a reference to an array, a structure, or a union.

IBM1626I S Extent must have computational type.

An expression specifying an array bound, a string length, or an AREA
size must have numeric or string type.

IBM1627I S Subscript expressions must be scalars.

The maximum length of the file specification is 8 characters.

IBM1620I S File specification missing after INCLUDE.

An expression used as a subscript must not be an array, structure,
or union reference.

%INCLUDE must be followed by a file name, not just a semicolon.

IBM1621I S NODESCRIPTOR attribute is invalid if any parameters have
bit alignment.

If a parameter is an unaligned bit string or an array or structure
consisting entirely of unaligned bit strings, then OPTIONS(NODESCRIPTOR)
must not be specified or implied.

IBM1622I S The number of elements and dimension specifications in an
aggregate must not exceed 131071.

IBM1628I S Index number index number into the array variable name must
have computational type.

Only expressions having numeric or string type may be used as subscripts.

IBM1629I S Extents for STATIC variable are not constant.

Array bounds, string lengths, and AREA sizes in STATIC variables must
evaluate at compile-time to constants.

IBM1630I S Number of dimensions in arrays do not match.

Aggregates with more than 131071 elements and dimension specifications
would require descriptors that would require too much storage.

In the assignment of one array to another, the two arrays must have the
same number of dimensions.

IBM1631I S Upper and lower bounds in arrays do not match.

In the assignment of one array to another, the two arrays must have the
same lower and upper bound in each dimension.

IBM1632I S Index number index number into the variable variable name is
less than the lower bound for that dimension.

IBM1635I S Upper and lower bounds in subelements of structures do
not match.

In structure assignments and structure expressions, all subelements that
are arrays must have the same bounds.

Executing such a program would most likely cause a protection exception.

    dcl a(5:10)  fixed bin(31);

    a(1) = 0;

IBM1633I S Index number index number into the variable variable name is
greater than the upper bound for that dimension.

Executing such a program would most likely cause a protection exception.

    dcl a(5:10)  fixed bin(31);

    a(20) = 0;

IBM1634I S In structure assignments and structure expressions, all
subelements that are arrays must have the same number of dimensions.

    dcl
      1 a,
        2 b(8)     fixed bin, 2 c        char(10);

    dcl
      1 x,
        2 y(8,9)   fixed bin, 2 z        char(10);

    a = x;

    dcl
      1 a,
        2 b(8)     fixed bin, 2 c        char(10);

    dcl
      1 x,
        2 y(9)     fixed bin, 2 z        char(10);

    a = x;

IBM1636I S Substructuring in subelements of structures do not match.

In structure assignments and structure expressions, if any element of
one structure is itself a structure, then the corresponding element in
all the other structures must also be a similar structure.

IBM1637I S Number of subelements in structures do not match.

IBM1638I S Structures and unions are not permitted in GENERIC
descriptions.

Only scalars and arrays of scalars are permitted in GENERIC descriptions.

IBM1639I S The aggregate aggregate-name contains only noncomputational
values. The aggregate will be ignored.

Aggregates containing no strings or arithmetic variables cannot be used
in PUT or GET statements.

Number of dimensions in subelements of structures do not match.

In structure assignments and structure expressions, all structures must
have the same number of elements.

IBM1640I S The aggregate aggregate-name contains one or more unions and
cannot be used in stream I/O.

IBM1645I S Data aggregate exceeds the maximum length.

Aggregates containing one or more UNION statements cannot be used in
PUT or GET statements.

IBM1641I S References to slices of the array of structures structure-name
are not permitted.

An array of structures must be referenced in its entirety or element
by element.

    dcl
      1 a(8,9),
        2 b        fixed bin, 2 c        char(10);

    a(2,*) = 0;

IBM1642I S References to slices of the array of unions union-name are
not permitted.

An array of unions must be referenced in its entirety or element by
element.

    dcl
      1 a(8,9) union,
        2 b        fixed bin, 2 c        char(10);

    a(2,*) = 0;

IBM1643I S Each dimension of an array must contain no more than 2147483647
elements.

Aggregates containing unaligned bits must be less than 2**28 bytes in
size while all other aggregates must be less than 2**31.

IBM1646I S SIZE would be raised in assigning TO value to control variable.

If the TO value is bigger than the maximum value that a FIXED or PICTURE
variable can hold, then a loop dominated by that variable would cause SIZE
to be raised. For example, in the first code fragment below, x can not
be assigned a value bigger than 99. In the second code fragment below,
y can not be assigned a value bigger than 32767.

     dcl x pic'99';

     do x = 1 to 100;
       put skip list( x );
     end;

     dcl y fixed bin(15);

     do y = 1 to 32768;
       put skip list( y );
     end;

IBM1647I S Too few subscripts specified for the variable variable name.

The number of subscripts given for a variable must match that variable's
number of dimensions

IBM1648I S Too many subscripts specified for the variable variable name.

The number of subscripts given for a variable must match that variable's
number of dimensions

It must be possible to compute the value of the DIMENSION built-in
function for an array. In DECLARE x(x:y), ( y-x+1) must be less than
214748648.

IBM1649I S The number of inherited dimensions plus the number of member
dimensions exceeds 15.

IBM1644I S Aggregate contains more than 15 logical levels.

The maximum physical level allowed is 255, but the maximum logical level
is 15.

Arrays with more than 15 dimensions are not supported.

    dcl
      1 dim7(2,3,4,5,6,7,8),
        2 dim7more(2,3,4,5,6,7,8)
          3 dim2many(2,3)  fixed bin, 3 *              fixed bin,
        2 *  char(10);

IBM1653I S A LIKE reference in an ENTRY declaration must not be a member
of a structure or union containing that ENTRY declaration.

IBM1650I S The LIKE reference is neither a structure nor a union.

LIKE definitions must not be recursive.

The LIKE reference cannot be a scalar or an array of scalars.

    dcl
      a fixed bin, 1 b like a;

    dcl
      1 a based,
        2 b1   fixed bin(31), 2 b2   fixed bin(31), 2 b3,
          3 c limited entry( like a );

IBM1654I S The keyword name reference is unknown.

IBM1651I S The keyword name reference is ambiguous.

The LIKE reference needs enough qualification to be unique. This message
also applies to INDFOR and VALUELISTFROM.

    dcl
      1 x like b, 1 a,
        2 b,
          3 c, 3 d,
        2 e,
          3 f, 3 g,
      1 h,
        2 b,
          3 j, 3 k;

IBM1652I S Neither the LIKE reference nor any of its substructures can
be declared with the LIKE attribute.

LIKE from LIKE is not supported.

    dcl
      1 a,
        2 b1 like c, 2 b2 like c,
      1 c,
        2 d fixed bin, 2 e fixed bin;
    dcl
      1 x like a;

The LIKE reference must be known in the block containing the LIKE
attribute specification.  This message also applies to INDFOR and
VALUELISTFROM.

IBM1655I S Only CONTROLLED variables can be passed to CONTROLLED
parameters.

If a parameter is declared as controlled, non- controlled variables and
expressions with operators cannot be passed to it.

   dcl c char(20);

   call a(c);

   a: proc( b );
     dcl b controlled char(*);

IBM1656I S A CONTROLLED variable passed to a CONTROLLED parameter must
have the same attributes as that parameter.

Differences in any arithmetic attributes are not permitted. The following
example will emit this message.

   dcl x fixed bin(15) controlled;

   call a(x);

   a: proc( b );
     dcl b controlled fixed bin(31);

IBM1657I S A subscript has been specified for the non-array variable
variable name.

Only scalars can be assigned to scalars.

IBM1662I S Unsupported use of union or structure containing a union.

Subscripts are permitted only in array element references.

IBM1658I S Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY
name is an array expression requiring a temporary array with strings of
unknown length.

Unions and structures containing unions may not be used in expressions
except when used as an argument to a built-in function such as ADDR
or UNSPEC.

IBM1663I S Unsupported or invalid use of structure expression.

Structure expressions may not, for instance, be assigned to arrays
of scalars.

Temporary arrays of strings are supported only if the string length
is known.

IBM1664I S Array expressions cannot be assigned to non-arrays.

    dcl a entry, (b(10),c(10)) char(20) var;

    call a( b || c );

IBM1659I S After LIKE expansion, aggregate would contain more than 15
logical levels.

The total number of logical levels after LIKE expansion must not
exceed 15.

IBM1660I S The size ( record-size ) of the record conflicts with the
RECSIZE ( recsize ) specified in the ENVIRONMENT attribute.

Array expressions may not, for instance, be assigned to structures
or scalars.

IBM1665I S E15 sort exit routines must have the RETURNS attribute.

An E15 sort exit have the RETURNS attribute since it will be invoked as
a function by the sort library routine.

IBM1666I S E15 sort exit routines must return a CHARACTER string.

An E15 sort exit may return a NONVARYING, VARYING or VARYINGZ CHARACTER
string, but it must be a character string.

Execution of the statement would raise the RECORD condition.

IBM1667I S Target in assignment is NONASSIGNABLE.

    dcl datei         file record output
                      env( fb recsize (80)
total ) ;

    dcl satzaus       char (100);

    write file(datei) from(satzaus);

The target in an assignment statement must not have the NONASSIGNABLE
attribute.

IBM1668I S Target in assignment is a function reference.

IBM1661I S Aggregates cannot be assigned to scalars.

The target of an assignment statement must be an array, structure,
union or scalar reference. Function references are not permitted as
target of assignments.

IBM1669I S Unsupported assignment to a target containing a UNION.

A BY NAME assignment may have not have a mixture of array and non-array
targets.

    dcl 1 a, 2 a1 fixed bin, 2 a2 fixed bin; dcl 1 b(3), 2 a1 fixed bin,
    2 a2 fixed bin; dcl 1 c, 2 a1 fixed bin, 2 a2 fixed bin;

    a,b = c, by name;

Assignments to UNIONs or structures containing UNIONs are
restricted. Compound assignment operators are not supported, the source
must be a similar structure that contains matching UNIONs, both the
source and target must have extents known at compile time, and all UNIONs
involved must occupy a whole number of bytes.

IBM1673I S The target in a compound concatenate and assign must be a
VARYING or VARYINGZ string.

IBM1670I S A PROCEDURE containing ENTRY statements with differing RETURNS
attributes must return values BYADDR.

Only the simple assignment operator can be used to assign to a NONVARYING
string.

IBM1674I S Target in assignment contains UNIONs.

In a PROCEDURE containing ENTRY statements, if the PROCEDURE and ENTRY
statements do not all have the same RETURNS attributes, then all values
must be returned BYADDR. You can compile with DFT(RETURNS(BYADDR)) to
force this, or you can add the BYADDR attribute to each set of RETURNS
attribute. For example, you must either compile the following program
with DFT(RETURNS(BYADDR)) or change the "fixed bin" to "fixed bin byaddr".

    a: proc;
      return;
    b: entry returns( fixed bin );
      return( 1729 );
    end;

IBM1671I S The source in a structure assignment must be a scalar
expression or a matching structure.

The source in a structure assignment cannot be an array of scalars or
a structure that does not match the target.

IBM1672I S In multiple BY NAME assignments, if one target is an array
of structures, then all must be.

The target in an assignment must not contain any UNIONs.

IBM1675I S FROMALIEN option cannot be used with MAIN.

These two options are mutually exclusive.

IBM1676I S Source in assignment to LIMITED ENTRY must be either a non-
nested ENTRY constant or another LIMITED ENTRY.

ENTRY constants representing nested procedures and ENTRY variables not
declared with the LIMITED attribute cannot be assigned to variables with
the attributes LIMITED ENTRY.

IBM1677I S Assignment of ENTRY to target type is invalid. If the ENTRY
should be invoked, an argument list must be provided.

An ENTRY constant or variable without an argument list will not be
invoked and hence can be assigned only to an ENTRY variable.

IBM1678I S Assignment of source type to target type is invalid.

variable name and variable name do not match.

The target attributes conflict with the source attributes.

In a BY NAME assignment, arrays with matching names must have the same
number of dimensions.

IBM1679I S Assignment of POINTER to OFFSET is invalid unless the OFFSET
is declared with an AREA qualifier.

POINTER expressions can be converted to OFFSET only if the OFFSET is
declared with an AREA qualifier.

    dcl
      1 a,
        2 b(4,5)  bin(31,0), 2 c       bin(31,0);
    dcl
      1 x,
        2 b(4)    bin(31,0), 2 c       bin(31,0);

    a = x, by name;

IBM1680I S Assignment of OFFSET to POINTER is invalid unless the OFFSET
is declared with an AREA qualifier.

IBM1685I S Upper and lower bounds in BY NAME corresponding elements
variable name and variable name do not match.

OFFSET variables can be converted to POINTER only if the OFFSET is
declared with an AREA qualifier.

IBM1681I S The number of preprocessor invocations specified exceeds the
maximum number (25) allowed.

A maximum of 25 preprocessor invocations can be specified in the PP
option or in combination with the MACRO option.

IBM1682I S The target in a BY NAME assignment must be a structure.

In a BY NAME assignment, arrays with matching names must have the same
lower and upper bounds.

    dcl
      1 a,
        2 b(1:5)  bin(31,0), 2 c       bin(31,0);
    dcl
      1 x,
        2 b(0:4)  bin(31,0), 2 c       bin(31,0);

    a = x, by name;

IBM1686I S BY NAME assignment contains UNIONs.

The target in a BY NAME assignment cannot be an array or a scalar.

IBM1683I S Set of matching names in the expansion of BY NAME assignment
must contain either all structures or no structures.

For instance, in the assignment, x = y, by name, if both x and y
immediately contain a member z, then either both x.z and y.z are
structures or neither x.z and y.z is a structure.

IBM1684I S Number of dimensions in the BY NAME corresponding elements

The target structure in a BY NAME assignment must not contain any UNIONs
even if no names in those UNIONs match names in the source. The source
expression also must contain any unions or structures containing unions.

IBM1687I S reserved name cannot be declared with OPTIONS other than ASM.

If the DLI compiler option is specified, PLITDLI cannot be declared with
any OPTIONS other than OPTIONS(ASM).

IBM1688I S reserved name cannot be declared with an entry description
list.

If the DLI compiler option is specified, PLITDLI cannot be declared with
an entry description list.

IBM1689I S reserved name cannot be declared as a function.

CALL x is invalid unless x is a built-in subroutine, an ENTRY constant,
or an ENTRY variable. Built-in functions are not built-in references. For
example, "Call SQRT(x)" is invalid.

IBM1695I S Reference in CALL statement must either be a built-in
subroutine or have type ENTRY.

If the DLI compiler option is specified, PLITDLI cannot be declared as
a function.

CALL x is invalid unless x is a built-in subroutine, an ENTRY constant,
or an ENTRY variable.

IBM1690I S OPTIONS(language-name) is not supported for functions.

IBM1696I S RETURN statement without an expression is invalid inside a
nested PROCEDURE that specified the RETURNS attribute.

Functions, i.e. entrys declared with the RETURNS attribute, cannot be
declared with OPTIONS(ASM) or OPTIONS(COBOL).

IBM1691I S Extents in ENTRY descriptors must be asterisks or restricted
expressions with computational type.

In ENTRY descriptors, each array bound, string length and AREA size must
be specified either with an asterisk or with a restricted expression
that has computational type.

IBM1692I S An ENTRY invoked as a function must have the RETURNS attribute.

There is no default RETURNS attribute.

    dcl e entry;

    a = e();

IBM1693I S call-option option repeated in CALL statement.

All RETURN statements inside functions must specify a value to be
returned.

    a: proc returns( fixed bin );

      return;

IBM1697I S RETURN statement is invalid inside a PROCEDURE that did not
specify the RETURNS attribute.

A statement of the form RETURN(x) is valid inside only PROCEDUREs that
are defined with a RETURNS attribute.

IBM1698I S RETURN statement with an expression is invalid inside a BEGIN
in a PROCEDURE that does not have the RETURNS(BYADDR) attribute.

A statement of the form RETURN(x) is valid inside a BEGIN block only
if the PROCEDURE enclosing that BEGIN block has the RETURNS(BYADDR)
attribute explicitly or by default.

The TASK, EVENT and PRIORITY options may be specified only once in any
CALL statement.

IBM1699I S IBM1694I S

Reference in CALL statement must not be a built-in function.

Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY name is an
aggregate. This conflicts with the BYVALUE option.

IBM1705I S Arrays, structures, and unions cannot be passed BYVALUE.

IBM1700I S attribute must be passed BYADDR.

RETURN expression with attribute source type is invalid for RETURNS
options specifying the attribute target type.

Even AREA variables with constant size must be passed BYADDR.

The RETURN expression must have a type that can be converted to the type
indicated in the RETURNS option.

IBM1701I S Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference ENTRY name
is a string with unknown size. This conflicts with the BYVALUE option.

    a: proc returns( pointer )

      return( 0 );
    end;

IBM1706I S Only strings with constant size can be passed BYVALUE.

IBM1702I S The attribute keyword attribute is invalid as a RETURNS
subattribute.

Structures and union may not be returned. The following code example
is invalid:

RETURN expression with attribute source type is invalid for RETURNS
options specifying the attribute target type. If the ENTRY should be
invoked, an argument list must be provided.

The RETURN expression must have a type that can be converted to the type
indicated in the RETURNS option.

   dcl a entry returns( 1 union, 2 ptr, 2 ptr );

IBM1703I S Reference in CALL statement must not be an aggregate reference.

    a: proc returns( pointer )

      dcl f entry returns( pointer ); return( f );
    end;

CALL references must be scalars.

    dcl ea(10) entry;

    call ea;

IBM1704I S Too many argument lists have been specified for the variable
variable name.

A function can have only one argument list unless it returns an ENTRY,
in which case it can have only two argument lists unless the returned
ENTRY returns an ENTRY, and so on.

IBM1707I S RETURN expression with attribute source type is invalid for
RETURNS options specifying the attribute LIMITED ENTRY.

Only an EXTERNAL ENTRY CONSTANT, an ENTRY CONSTANT representing a
non-nested PROCEDURE, or an ENTRY VARIABLE with the LIMITED attribute
can be specified as the RETURNS expression in a function that returns
a LIMITED ENTRY.

IBM1708I S RETURN expression with attribute POINTER is invalid for RETURNS
options specifying the attribute OFFSET since the OFFSET attribute is
not declared with an AREA qualifier.

POINTER expressions can be converted to OFFSET only if the offset is
declared with an AREA qualifier.

IBM1709I S RETURN expression with attribute OFFSET is invalid for RETURNS
options specifying the attribute POINTER since the OFFSET expression is
not an OFFSET variable declared with an AREA qualifier.

OFFSET variables can be converted to POINTER only if the OFFSET is
declared with an AREA qualifier.

IBM1710I S ORDINAL type in RETURN expression and RETURNS option must
match.

In RETURNS descriptors, each array bound, string length, and AREA size
must be specified with a restricted expression that has computational
type.  Unlike ENTRY descriptors, asterisks are not permitted.

IBM1715I S Exit from an ON-unit via RETURN is invalid.

RETURN statements are not permitted in an ON-unit or any of its contained
BEGIN blocks unless the contained block is also contained in a procedure
defined in the ON-unit.

IBM1716I S FORMAT expression must be a scalar value.

In a function that returns an ordinal, the ORDINAL type in any RETURN
expression must be the same as returned by the function.

Expressions in FORMAT lists, including SKIP clauses, must represent
scalar values.

IBM1717I S FORMAT expression must have computational type.

    a: proc returns( ordinal color );

      dcl i ordinal intensity; return( i );
    end;

IBM1711I S Expression in RETURN statement must be scalar.

The expression in a RETURN statement must not be an array, a structure,
or a union.

IBM1712I S External name specification must be a non-null string.

EXTERNAL('') is invalid.

IBM1713I S Function function name contains no RETURN statement.

Functions must contain at least one RETURN statement.

Expressions in FORMAT lists, including SKIP clauses, must have
computational type so that the expression can be converted to FIXED
BIN(31).

IBM1718I S source type is invalid as a Boolean expression.

The expression in an IF, WHILE, UNTIL, SELECT, or WHEN clause must have
computational type so that it can be converted to BIT(1).

IBM1719I S ENTRY is invalid as a Boolean expression. If an ENTRY should
be invoked, an argument list must be provided.

The expression in an IF, WHILE, UNTIL, SELECT, or WHEN clause must have
computational type so that it can be converted to BIT(1). An ENTRY cannot
be used as a Boolean expression. If the ENTRY is a function which should
be invoked, an argument list, even if it consists only of a left and
right parenthesis, must be provided.

IBM1714I S Extents in RETURNS descriptors must be constants.

IBM1720I S Expression for calculating size of variable with adjustable
extents is

too complicated. Variable may be defined in terms of itself.

IBM1726I S Subtraction of target type from source type is invalid.

An expression used in calculating the size of a variable must not depend
on any values that the variable may have because those values do not
exist until storage can be allocated for the variable.

The first operand in a subtraction must be computational or a locator. The
second operand can be a locator only if the first is a locator. Otherwise,
the second operand must be computational.

IBM1721I S Expression contains too many nested subexpressions.

IBM1727I S Subtraction of target type from source type is invalid. If
an ENTRY should be invoked, an argument list must be provided.

The compiler's space for evaluating expressions has been
exhausted. Rewrite the expression in terms of simpler expressions.

IBM1722I S The number of error messages allowed by the MAXMSG option
has been exceeded.

Compilation will terminate when the number of messages has exceeded the
limit set in the MAXMSG compiler option.

IBM1723I S Result of concatenating two literals is too long.

The length of the string literal produced by concatenating two string
literals must not be greater than the maximum allowed for a literal with
the derived string type.

IBM1724I S Addition of source type and target type is invalid.

One of the operands in an addition must be computational and the other
must be either computational or a locator.

IBM1725I S Addition of source type and target type is invalid. If an
ENTRY should be invoked, an argument list must be provided.

An ENTRY cannot be used as an arithmetic operand. If the ENTRY is a
function which should be invoked, an argument list, even if it consists
only of a left and right parenthesis, must be provided.

An ENTRY cannot be used as an arithmetic operand. If the ENTRY is a
function which should be invoked, an argument list, even if it consists
only of a left and right parenthesis, must be provided.

IBM1728I S Multiplication of source type by target type is invalid.

Both operands in a multiplication must be computational.

IBM1729I S Multiplication of source type by target type is invalid. If
an ENTRY should be invoked, an argument list must be provided.

An ENTRY cannot be used as an arithmetic operand. If the ENTRY is a
function which should be invoked, an argument list, even if it consists
only of a left and right parenthesis, must be provided.

IBM1730I S Division of source type by target type is invalid.

Both operands in a division must be computational.

IBM1731I S Division of source type by target type is invalid. If an
ENTRY should be invoked, an argument list must be provided.

An ENTRY cannot be used as an arithmetic operand. If the ENTRY is a
function which should be invoked, an argument list, even if it consists
only of a left and right parenthesis, must be provided.

IBM1732I S Unsupported use of aggregate expression.

should be invoked, an argument list must be provided.

Aggregate expressions are supported only as the source in an assignment
statement and, with some limitations, as an argument to the ANY or ALL
built-in functions.

ENTRYs can be compared only with other ENTRYs. If the ENTRY is a function
which should be invoked, an argument list, even if it consists only of
a left and right parenthesis, must be provided.

IBM1733I S Concatenate operands must have computational type.

IBM1739I S TASK variables may not be compared.

Only expressions having string or numeric type may be concatenated.

No relational operations are defined for TASK variables.

IBM1734I S Operand in a prefix expression is not computational.

IBM1740I S The prefix operators (plus, minus, and logical not) may be
applied only to expressions having string or numeric type.

Comparison of an OFFSET to a POINTER is invalid since the OFFSET comparand
is not an OFFSET variable declared with an AREA qualifier.

IBM1735I S AREA variables may not be compared.

No relational operations are defined for AREA variables.

IBM1736I S Comparison of source type to target type is invalid.

An OFFSET can be compared with a POINTER as long as the OFFSET can be
converted to a POINTER. This requires that the OFFSET is declared with
an AREA qualifier.

IBM1741I S Operands in comparison have differing strong types.

Comparisons of strongly-typed variables are invalid unless both have
the same type.

Computational types can be compared only with other computational
types, and non-computational types can be compared only with like
non-computational types.

    dcl hp  handle point; dcl hr  handle rectangle;

    if hp = hr then
      ...

IBM1737I S Comparison of ENTRY to target type is invalid. If the ENTRY
should be invoked, an argument list must be provided.

ENTRYs can be compared only with other ENTRYs. If the ENTRY is a function
which should be invoked, an argument list, even if it consists only of
a left and right parenthesis, must be provided.

IBM1738I S Comparison of source type to ENTRY is invalid. If the ENTRY

IBM1742I S Compared ORDINALs must have the same ORDINAL type.

ORDINALs cannot be compared with other ORDINALs having a different
ORDINAL type.

IBM1743I S Source and target in assignment have differing strong types.

Assignments of strongly-typed variables are invalid unless both have
the same type.

IBM1744I S Conversion of ORDINALs is invalid unless both have the same
ORDINAL type.

Reorder the declarations in your program. For example, the following
declarations should be in reverse order.

    dcl a char( length(b) ) auto; dcl b char( 10 ) auto;

ORDINALs cannot be assigned to other ORDINALs having different ORDINAL
type.

IBM1749I S VALUE and INITIAL expressions must be scalars.

IBM1745I S In a function that returns a strong type, the type in any
RETURN expression must be the same as that returned by the function.

For instance, in a function that returns a typed structure, any RETURN
expression must have the same structure type.

IBM1746I S VALUE, VALUELIST, VALUERANGE, and STATIC INITIAL expressions
must be constant.

These expressions must be reducible to a constant at compile-time.

    dcl a fixed bin static nonassignable
init(0);
    dcl m fixed bin value( a ); dcl n fixed bin static init( a );

Aggregate expressions are not valid as INITIAL and VALUE expressions.

IBM1750I S INITIAL attribute is invalid for the STATIC LABEL variable
variable- name since it has the MEMBER attribute.

The INITIAL attribute is supported for a STATIC LABEL variable only if
the variable is a scalar or an array of scalars.

IBM1751I S INITIAL attribute is valid for the STATIC ENTRY variable
variable- name only if it has the LIMITED attribute.

ENTRY variables that don't have the LIMITED attribute require block
activation information, and hence they cannot be initialized at
compile-time.

IBM1747I S Function cannot be used before the function's descriptor list
has been scanned.

IBM1753I S INITIAL attribute is invalid for the STATIC FORMAT variable
variable- name.

This is a compiler restriction. Reorder the declarations and blocks
in your program. For example, the following declarations should be in
reverse order.

    dcl a char( csize( x, y ) ); dcl csize entry( char(2), fixed bin )
               returns( fixed bin );

IBM1748I S Extents of automatic variables must not depend on the extents
of automatic variables declared later in the same block.

FORMAT variables require block activation information, and hence they
cannot be initialized at compile-time. If the variable were not a member
of a structure, the storage class would be changed to AUTOMATIC and an
error message would be issued instead.

IBM1754I S An asterisk iteration factor can be applied only to the last
expression in the INITIAL item list for variable-name.

Since an asterisk iteration factor completes the initialization of a
variable, it cannot be followed by more initial values.

If more than one element in a STATIC UNION had an INITIAL value, it
would not be clear which should take precedence.

     dcl a(10)  fixed bin init( 1, 2, (*) 0,
8 );

     dcl
       1 a union static,
         2 b   fixed bin(31) init( 17 ), 2 c   fixed bin(15) init( 19 );

IBM1755I S An asterisk iteration factor cannot be used in the nested
INITIAL item list for variable-name.

IBM1759I S An asterisk iteration can be used only in a non-nested INITIAL
item list. The following example is invalid.

     dcl a(20) fixed bin init( (2) ( 1, (*)
2 ) );

IBM1756I S The scalar variable variable-name has an INITIAL list with
more than one item.

Non-null INITIAL values are not supported for the STATIC NONCONNECTED
array variable- name since it has the attributes UNALIGNED BIT.

The only supported INITIAL values for a STATIC UNALIGNED BIT variable
with inherited dimensions are bit strings equal to ''b.

     dcl
       1 a(10,2) static,
         2 b1  bit(1) init( (20) '1'b ), 2 b2  bit(1) init( (20) '0'b );

Only arrays can have an INITIAL list with more than one element.

IBM1760I S LABEL constant in the STATIC INITIAL list for variable-name
must not be an element of a LABEL CONSTANT array.

     dcl a  fixed bin init( 1, 2 );

IBM1757I S LABEL constant in STATIC INITIAL for the variable variable-name
must be in the same block as the LABEL being initialized.

Replace the subscripted LABEL with an unsubscripted one or change the
storage class to AUTOMATIC.

     lx(1):; lx(2):;

Change the storage class to AUTOMATIC.

     dcl la(2) static label init( lx(2),
lx(1) );

     lx:;

     subproc: proc;

       dcl la  static label init( lx );

     end;

IBM1758I S IBM1761I S

ENTRY reference in INITIAL clause for the STATIC ENTRY variable
variable-name must not be FETCHABLE.

Only one element in the STATIC UNION variable-name may have the INITIAL
attribute.

The variable y in DCL x ENTRY LIMITED INIT(y) must not be FETCHABLE;
y must not be used in a FETCH or RELEASE statement, and y must not have
the OPTIONS(FETCHABLE) attribute.

IBM1762I S INITIAL iteration factor must have computational type.

Iteration factors in INITIAL lists must have numeric or string types.

IBM1763I S INITIAL iteration factor must be a scalar.

Named constants may not be used as control variables in DO loops.

    dcl n fixed bin value( 7 );

    do n = 1 to 5;

IBM1768I S Control variable in DO statement must have VARIABLE attribute.

An iteration factor in an INITIAL list must not be an array, structure,
or union.

IBM1764I S The BYVALUE attribute is invalid for strings of nonconstant
length.

Constants may not be used as control variables in DO loops.

    dcl ex external entry, (ev1, ev2) entry;

Strings with nonconstant length must be passed and received by address.

    do ex = ev1, ev2;

    a: proc( x );
      dcl x char(*) byvalue;

IBM1765I S Length of string with the VALUE attribute must be a constant
or an asterisk.

IBM1769I S Control variable has type POINTER, but TO expression does not.

If the control variable in a DO loop has POINTER type, the TO expression
must have POINTER type. Implicit conversion from OFFSET to POINTER is
not supported in this context.

Named strings must have a constant length or a length determined from
their VALUE.

IBM1770I S Control variable in loop with TO clause must have computational
or locator type.

    dcl a fixed bin automatic; dcl s char(a) value('variable length');

IBM1766I S VALUE for variable-name must be evaluated before its first use.

In a DO loop with a TO clause, the control variable must have a type that
allows a comparison of less than and greater than. This is possible only
for computational and locator types.

IBM1771I S Named constants must be evaluated before they are used. Reorder
the declarations so that each named constant is declared before its
first use.

The variable name built-in function may be used as a pseudovariable in
a DO-loop only if the length of the pseudovariable reference is known
at compile time.

    dcl a char(n) static init( 'tooSoon' ); dcl n fixed bin value( 7 );

IBM1767I S Control variable in DO statement must not be a named constant.

SUBSTR and UNSPEC may be used as pseudovariables in DO-loops only if
their derived length is known at compile time.

IBM1772I S Source in DO loop initialization must be scalar.

In a DO loop of the form DO a = b TO c, b must be a scalar.

IBM1773I S Control variable in DO statement must be a scalar.

In a DO loop of the form DO x = .., x must be a scalar.

IBM1774I S Compiler restriction: control variable in DO statement must
not be a BASED or CONTROLLED string or area that has non-constant extent.

In a DO loop of the form DO x = .., if x is a string or an area, then
it must have constant size or must be static, automatic, or defined.

IBM1775I S BY expression must have computational type.

IBM1778I S Control variable in loop with TO clause must not be COMPLEX.

In a DO loop with a TO clause, the control variable must have a type that
allows a comparison of less than and greater than. This is possible for
numeric types only if the numeric type is REAL.

IBM1779I S TO expression must have computational type.

The expression in the TO clause of a DO loop must have a string or
numeric type.

IBM1780I S SIGNAL ANYCONDITION is invalid.

ON ANYCONDITION may be used to trap conditions not otherwise trapped,
but ANYCONDITION may not be signalled.

IBM1781I S And, or and exclusive-or of source type and target type
is invalid.

The expression in the BY clause of a DO loop must have a string or numeric
type. It cannot have a locator type because it must be comparable to zero.

Bitwise operands must have a computational type.

IBM1776I S BY expression must not be COMPLEX.

IBM1782I S The expression in the BY clause of a DO loop must be REAL.

And, or and exclusive-or of source type and target type is invalid. If
an ENTRY should be invoked, an argument list must be provided.

    dcl z cplx float;

    do jx = 1 to 10 by z;

IBM1777I S TO expression must not be COMPLEX.

An ENTRY cannot be used as a bitwise operand. If the ENTRY is a function
which should be invoked, an argument list, even if it consists only of
a left and right parenthesis, must be provided.

IBM1783I S BASED variable without an implicit qualifier must be explicitly
qualified.

The expression in the TO clause of a DO loop must be REAL

    dcl z cplx float;

    do jx = 1 to z;

A variable declared as BASED instead of as BASED( reference ) must always
be explicitly qualified.  This is necessary even when the variable is
an argument to built-in functions such as STORAGE.

IBM1784I S The ENTRY variable-name may not be used as a locator qualifier
since it does not have the RETURNS attribute.

Functions, but not subprocedures, can be used as locator qualifiers
(and then only if they return a locator).

IBM1785I S The variable variable-name is used as a locator qualifier,
but it is not a scalar.

Only scalars can be used as locator qualifiers.

IBM1786I S BUILTIN name built-in function may not be used as a locator
qualifier.

The named built-in function cannot be used as a locator qualifier since
it does not return a POINTER.

IBM1787I S The ENTRY variable-name may not be used as a locator qualifier.

x(...)->y is invalid unless x returns a POINTER or an OFFSET declared
with a qualifying AREA.

IBM1789I S The qualifier variable-name does not have locator type.

Only POINTERs and OFFSETs declared with a qualifying AREA can be used
as locator qualifiers.

IBM1790I S Locator qualification is invalid for variable-name.

IBM1793I S The variable name built-in function may not be used as a
pseudovariable in a DO-loop.

Only IMAG, REAL, SUBSTR and UNSPEC may be used as pseudovariables in
DO loops.

IBM1794I S Too many implicit locators are needed to resolve the
qualification for a variable. Variable may be based on itself.

An implicitly qualified variable must require no more than 15 qualifiers
to be completely qualified. If it requires more, this may indicate its
qualifiers are too interdependent.

    dcl a pointer based(b); dcl b pointer based(a); a = null();

IBM1795I S The OFFSET variable variable- name may not be used as a
locator qualifier since it was not declared with an AREA specification.

An OFFSET variable can be used as a locator qualifier only if it can be
converted to a pointer value. This requires that the offset be declared
with an AREA qualification.

IBM1796I S Qualifier must be a scalar.

Locator qualification is valid only for BASED variables.

Arrays, structures, and unions may not be used as locator qualifiers.

IBM1791I S The locator qualified reference reference name is ambiguous.

IBM1797I S BASED variables may not contain extents with nonconstant
values if other extents use the REFER option.

All references must be unambiguous.

IBM1792I S The locator qualified reference reference name is unknown.

Locator qualified references must be explicitly declared. BASED variables
may not be implicitly declared.

The REFER option cannot be used in a BASED variable which also has an
extent that is set by a non-constant expression.

IBM1798I S Invalid scale factor in PICTURE specification.

The picture character F specifies a picture scaling factor for fixed-point
decimal numbers. The number of digits following the V picture character,
minus the integer specified with F, must be between -128 and 127.

Character PICTURE specifications are not permitted in C-format items.

IBM1805I S Precision in numeric PICTURE must NOT be less than 1.

IBM1799I S Invalid characters in PICTURE specification.

The picture specification can contain only A X 9 for the Character
Data, and only 9 V Z * , . / B S + - $ CR DB Y K E F < > for the Numeric
Data. The characters between the insertion characters < > are not affected
by this rule.

IBM1800I S Invalid characters in the F scaling factor.

The picture character F specifies a picture scaling factor for fixed-point
decimal numbers. The format is F(n) where n can be any signed integer
between -128 and 127 inclusively.

IBM1801I S A character PICTURE string may have only A, X, or 9.

The precision field within a numeric data picture specification must
contain at least one digit.

IBM1806I S The precision in FIXED DECIMAL PICTURE is too big.

The precision in the fixed decimal picture specification must not exceed
that specified in the LIMITS compiler option.

IBM1807I S Precision in FLOAT DECIMAL PICTURE is too big.

The precision in the float decimal picture specification is limited by
the hardware to 18 digits.

IBM1808I S PICTURE string is empty.

The picture specification can contain only A, X, or 9 for the character
data. Other characters are not permitted.

IBM1802I S Invalid precision in PICTURE fixed decimal precision.

Null picture strings (''P) are invalid.

IBM1809I S Exponent in FLOAT PICTURE is too long. Exponent will be
truncated to fit.

The number of digits for the precision field within a numeric data
picture specification must be between one and the maximum allowed by
the LIMITS(FIXEDDEC) option.

The number of digits in the exponent of the float decimal picture
specification is limited to 4.

IBM1810I S Exponent in FLOAT PICTURE has no digits.

IBM1803I S Too many T, I, or R appear in the PICTURE specification.

T, I, or R are the overpunched characters in the picture
specification. Only one overpunched character can appear in the
specification for a fixed point number.  A floating-point specification
can contain two (One in the mantissa field and one in the exponent field).

IBM1804I S PICTURE specifications in C- format items must be arithmetic.

The exponent in the float decimal picture specification is missing. It
must be entered even if it is zero.

IBM1811I S Exponent in PICTURE specification cannot contain V.

V specifies an implicit decimal point. Therefore, it is not permitted
in the exponent field.

IBM1812I S FLOAT PICTURE cannot contain CR, DB or F.

The expression must be arithmetic or string.

Credit (CR), debit (DB), and scale factor (F) are only allowed in the
FIXED picture specification.

IBM1813I S PICTURE specification is too long.  Excess characters are
truncated on the right.

The compiler restrictions on the length of the picture specification are:

    fixed decimal:  254 float decimal:  253 character data: 511

   dcl x label variable; put list( x );

IBM1817I S The KEYTO reference must be of type CHARACTER or GRAPHIC.

The KEYTO reference should have the data type character or graphic. The
reference can also be a variable with a non-numeric picture string
specification.

IBM1818I S I/O-option conflicts with previous options on the I/O-stmt
statement.

IBM1814I S PICTURE string has an invalid floating insertion character
string.

An option on the I/O statement conflicts with prior options.

The floating insertion string is delimited by < >.  Floating is done by
the > character. The string can contain any character with one exception:
the delimiters themselves. In order to include the characters < and >
in the floating insertion string, these angle brackets must be used in
an escaped format. << must be used to specify the character <, and <>
must be used to specify the character >. So, for example, <aaa<<bbb<>ccc>
denotes the insertion string aaa<bbb>ccc.

IBM1815I S BUILTIN name is a built-in subroutine. It should be used only
in CALL statements and not as a function.

    open file(f1) input output; read file(f) into(x) set(p);

IBM1819I S The I/O-option option is multiply specified on the I/O-stmt
statement.

Each option may be specified only once.

    read file(f1) ignore(1) ignore(2);

IBM1820I S Mandatory I/O-option option not specified on the I/O-stmt
statement.

Built-in subroutines cannot be used as functions - they can only be
called. For instance, the following code is invalid

A required statement element has not been specified.

   open output; write file(x);

    dcl pliretc builtin;

    rc = pliretc( 16 );

IBM1821I S Reference for from-into-option is an invalid element or
aggregate type.

IBM1816I S keyword item variable name is not computational.

An invalid scalar or aggregate reference has been specified for the FROM
or INTO clause in a record

I/O statement. The example below will cause this message to be issued.

IBM1827I S The reference in the keyword clause must have CHARACTER type.

  dcl f1 file; read file(f1) into(f1);

IBM1822I S The keyword-type expression must be computational.

The specified reference is invalid. It must be of type character. The
example below will cause this message to be issued.

The expression in a KEY or KEYFROM record I/O statement option must be
computational data.

IBM1823I S SET reference must have locator type.

   dcl p     pointer; display ('what is your name?') reply(p);

IBM1828I S The reference in the keyword clause must be a scalar variable.

In the SET clause of an ALLOCATE or LOCATE statement, the reference must
have the type POINTER or OFFSET.

The specified reference is invalid. It must be a scalar.  The example
below will cause this message to be issued.

IBM1824I S keyword expression must be scalar.

   dcl z(10) char(10); display ('what is your name?') reply(z);

The expression in the named keyword clause must be scalar. This keyword
clause could be an IF, UNTIL, WHILE, WHEN, KEY, KEYFROM or KEYTO clause.

   dcl f1    file; dcl x     char(10); dcl z(10) char(10); read file(f1)
   into(x) key(z);

IBM1825I S The reference in the keyword clause cannot be a built-in
function reference.

The references for the KEYTO, FROM, INTO, and SET record I/O options
cannot be built-in functions. The example below will cause this message
to be issued.

   dcl f1    file; dcl x     char(10); read file(f1) into(hex(x));

IBM1826I S The reference in the keyword clause cannot be a function
invocation.

The references for the KEYTO, FROM, INTO, and SET record I/O options
cannot be entry.

IBM1829I S The attributes of the argument in the clause clause conflict
with its usage.

The declared attributes conflict with their use in the statement.

   dcl f file stream; read file(f) into(x);

IBM1830I S keyword expression is not computational.

The expression must be arithmetic or string.

   dcl p pointer; put list( ptradd(p,2) );

IBM1831I S The LOCATE reference variable- name is not implicitly qualified
and is invalid without a SET clause.

Provide a SET clause in the LOCATE statement.

   dcl f file; dcl x char(10) based; locate x file(f1);

IBM1837I S The reference in the keyword clause cannot be a named constant.

IBM1832I S SET reference must have POINTER type.

The reference in the SET clause of a FETCH statement must have the
POINTER type. OFFSET types are not supported in this context.

IBM1833I S The aggregate reference in the from-into clause clause must
be CONNECTED.

The specified reference in the FROM or INTO record I/O option is
invalid. The reference must be connected.  The example below will cause
this message to be issued.

   dcl f1 file; dcl 1 a(3),
        2 b(4) char(4), 2 c(4) char(4);

   read file(f1) into(b);

IBM1834I S The expression in IGNORE must be computational.

The specified expression in the IGNORE option of the READ statement must
be computational. The example below will cause this message to be issued.

   dcl a  area;

   read file(f1) ignore(a);

IBM1835I S The LOCATE reference variable- name is not a level 1 BASED
variable.

The specified reference is invalid. It cannot be a named constant. The
example below will cause this message to be issued.

   dcl f1  file; dcl x   char(2); dcl val fixed bin(15) value(4);

   read file(f1) into(x) keyto(val);

IBM1838I S The attributes of argument-number conflict with its usage in
data directed I/O.

Only AUTOMATIC, CONTROLLED, PARAMETER, STATIC and and implicitly qualified
BASED variables are supported in data directed I/O.

   dcl q based; put data(q);

IBM1839I S DATA-directed I/O does not support references with locators.

Use a temporary or use LIST- or EDIT directed I/O.

IBM1840I S Subscripted references are not allowed in GET DATA.

Use a temporary or use GET LIST or GET EDIT.

IBM1841I S The first argument in the keyword- format item is invalid.

The format argument is outside the valid range.

The LOCATE reference may not be a structure member and must have the
storage attribute BASED.

   put edit('hi') (a( -1) );

IBM1836I S INITIAL attribute is invalid for structures.

IBM1842I S The INITIAL attribute is valid only for scalars and arrays
of scalars.

The field width specified in the keyword-format item is too small for
complete input or output of the data item.

The width specified is too small for complete processing.

    put edit(10190) (f(3));

IBM1843I S The fractional digits specified in the keyword-format item
is invalid.

The fractional number of digits must be less than or equal to the field
width and non-negative.

IBM1844I S The argument in the R-format item is not a format constant
or format variable.

The argument to the R-format item must be either a format constant or
a format variable.

IBM1845I S The significant digits specified in E-format item is invalid.

The number of significant digits must be greater than or equal to the
number of fractional digits, less than or equal to the field width and
non-negative.

IBM1846I S The format-item format item is invalid with GET/PUT STRING.

G, L, PAGE, LINE, SKIP, and COLUMN format items may not be used in
GET/PUT EDIT statements using the STRING option.

Under CMPAT(V1), bounds must be between -32768 and 32767 inclusive. To
use bounds outside this range, specify a different CMPAT option.

IBM1850I S Under CMPAT(V1), bounds must not be less than -32768.

Under CMPAT(V1), bounds must be between -32768 and 32767 inclusive. To
use bounds outside this range, specify a different CMPAT option.

IBM1851I S The INCLUDE file include-file-name could not be opened.

An unexpected error occurred while trying to open an include source file.

IBM1852I S The preprocessor preprocessor is not known to the compiler.

A preprocessor specified in the PP compiler option is unknown.

IBM1853I S Variable in statement statement must be a FETCHABLE entry
constant.

The argument in the FETCH and RELEASE statements must be a FETCHABLE
entry constant.

IBM1854I S Fetch of the PP name preprocessor failed with ONCODE= oncode.

IBM1847I S GOTO target is inside a (different) DO loop.

The target of a GOTO cannot be inside a DO loop unless the GOTO itself
is in the same DO loop.

IBM1848I S The INCLUDE file for include-stmt- arg could not be found.

The compiler's attempt to load the named preprocessor failed.

IBM1855I S Preprocessor PP name terminated abnormally with ONCODE=
oncode-value.

The INCLUDE file could not be found or opened.

IBM1849I S Under CMPAT(V1), bounds must not be greater than 32767.

A terminating error was detected in a preprocessor invoked by the
compiler.

IBM1856I S Fetch of the user exit initialization routine failed with
ONCODE= oncode.

The compiler was unable to load the user exit.

IBM1857I S User exit routine terminated abnormally with ONCODE=
oncode-value.

The compiler detected a terminating error in the user exit.

BASED or CONTROLLED or must be DEFINED on STATIC.

AUTOMATIC variables must be declared inside a PROCEDURE, and DEFINED
variables declared outside a PROCEDURE must be defined on STATIC.

IBM1864I S The function name built-in function is not supported.

IBM1858I S Compilation aborted by user exit.

Support for the indicated built-in function has been discontinued.

The user exit aborted the compilation by setting the return code to 16.

IBM1865I S IBM1859I S

The first statement must be a PROCEDURE or PACKAGE statement.

The only BASED variables supported in data-directed i/o are those
that have constant extents and that are implicitly qualified by simple
variables.

All other statements must be enclosed in a PACKAGE or PROCEDURE statement.

IBM1860I S PACKAGE statement must be the first statement in the program.

PACKAGE statements cannot follow any other statements in the program.

IBM1861I S All statements other than DECLARE, DEFAULT and PROCEDURE
statements must be contained inside a PROCEDURE.

The variable implicitly qualifying the BASED variable must be a scalar
that is not part of an array, structure or union, and it must be a
POINTER with either the AUTOMATIC or STATIC storage attribute.

IBM1866I S The keyword statement is not supported.

Support for the indicated statement has been discontinued.

IBM1867I S The pseudovariable variable name is not supported.

This message can occur, for instance, if the first PROCEDURE statement
is invalid or if a PROCEDURE contains too many END statements.

IBM1862I S Statements are nested too deep.

The nesting of PROCEDURE, DO, SELECT and similar statements is greater
than that supported by the compiler. Rewrite the program so that it is
less complicated.

IBM1863I S Variables declared in a PACKAGE outside of any PROCEDURE must
have the storage class STATIC,

Support for the indicated pseudovariable has been discontinued.

IBM1868I S Invalid use of iSUB.

iSUB references are permitted only in DEFINED clauses.

IBM1869I S ALLOCATE with attribute lists is not supported.

For example, neither of the following are supported.

    allocate x(5); allocate y char(10);

IBM1870I S ON statement cannot specify both SYSTEM and an ON-unit.

Blocks may be nested only 30 deep.

IBM1878I S The reference in the EVENT clause must have type EVENT.

A reference of any other type is invalid and is invalid.

If the SYSTEM action is specified in an ON statement, an ON-unit may
not be specified as well.

IBM1879I S The reference in the TASK clause must have type TASK.

    on error system stop;

IBM1871I S The reference in the CONDITION condition must have type
CONDITION.

x in CONDITION(x) refers to a variable that does not have the type
CONDITION.

IBM1872I S The reference in the condition- name condition must have
type FILE.

A reference of any other type is invalid and is invalid.

IBM1880I S Reference must have FILE type.

A file variable or constant is required.

   dcl x format variable; open file(x);

IBM1881I S The reference reference name is ambiguous.

The reference in the named FILE condition does not have the type FILE.

Enough qualification must be provided to make any reference unique.

IBM1873I S Nesting of DO statements exceeds the maximum.

IBM1882I S The ALLOCATE reference variable- name is not a level 1 BASED
or CONTROLLED variable.

DO statements can be nested only 50 deep. Simplify the program.

IBM1874I S Nesting of IF statements exceeds the maximum.

IF statements can be nested only 50 deep. Simplify the program.

IBM1875I S Nesting of SELECT statements exceeds the maximum.

SELECT statements can be nested only 50 deep.  Simplify the program.

IBM1876I S Nesting of blocks exceeds the maximum.

References in ALLOCATE statements must be level-1 variable names, and
those variables must have the BASED or CONTROLLED attributes.

IBM1883I S The ALLOCATE reference variable- name is not implicitly
qualified and is invalid without a SET clause.

Provide a SET clause in the ALLOCATE statement.

    dcl a based;

    allocate a;

IBM1884I S The reference variable-name in the GENERIC attribute list is
not a scalar ENTRY reference.

IBM1889I S The REFER object reference name must be a scalar.

A reference of any other type is invalid.

IBM1885I S IN option reference must have AREA type.

A reference of any other type is invalid.

The REFER object may not have any dimensions in its declaration and
neither may any of its parents.

    dcl
      1 a based,
        2 b(8),
          3 c        fixed bin, 3 d        char(10),
        2 e( n refer(c)) char(10);

IBM1886I S The REFER object name reference name is ambiguous.

IBM1890I S Provide enough qualification to make the name unique.

The REFER object reference name must precede the first level-2 element
containing a REFER.

    dcl
      1 a based,
        2 b1,
          3 c        bit(8) aligned, 3 d        char(10),
        2 b2,
          3 c        bit(8) aligned, 3 d        char(10),
        2 e( n refer(c)) char(10);

Reorder the elements in the declaration so that all REFER objects precede
the first level-2 element containing a REFER.

    dcl
      1 a based,
        2 b        fixed bin, 2 c        char( n refer(b) ), 2 d
        fixed bin, 2 e        char( n refer(d) );

IBM1887I S The REFER object reference name must be an element of the
same structure where it is used, and must precede its first usage in
that structure.

IBM1891I S REFER is not allowed on non- BASED variables.

The named REFER object cannot be declared in another structure or in
the same structure, but after its first usage.

REFER can be used only in declarations of BASED variables.

IBM1892I S The REFER object reference name must have constant length.

IBM1888I S The REFER object reference name must have computational type.

If a REFER object is a string, it must have constant length.

It must be possible to convert the REFER object safely to and from REAL
FIXED BIN(31,0).

IBM1893I S REFER is allowed only on members of structures and unions.

    dcl
      1 a based,
        2 b,
          3 c        pointer, 3 d        char(10),
        2 e( n refer(c)) char(10);

REFER cannot be used only in declarations of scalars or arrays of scalars.

IBM1894I S REINIT references must not be subscripted.

In the statement REINIT x, x must not have any subscripts or arguments.

IBM1895I S Operations involving OPTIONS(language-name) routines are not
supported if the DIRECTED option applies.

If the DIRECTED(ASM) option is used, comparisons and assignments are
not supported for ENTRYs declared with OPTIONS(ASM). Similarly, if the
DIRECTED(COBOL) option is used, comparisons and assignments are not
supported for ENTRYs declared with OPTIONS(COBOL).

IBM1900I S Extents for DEFINED bit structures must be constant.

All bounds and string lengths for DEFINED structures and unions consisting
of bit strings must be constant.

IBM1901I S POSITION attribute is invalid without the DEFINED attribute.

The POSITION attribute has no meaning without DEFINED attribute.

IBM1902I S The expression in the POSITION attribute must have
computational type.

IBM1896I S OPTIONS(language-name) is not supported for ENTRY VARIABLEs
if the DIRECTED option applies.

If the DIRECTED(ASM) option is used, ENTRY VARIABLES may not be declared
with OPTIONS(ASM).  Similarly, if the DIRECTED(COBOL) option is used,
ENTRY VARIABLES may not be declared with OPTIONS(COBOL).

The POSITION expression must have a numeric or string type.

IBM1903I S The expression in the POSITION attribute for bit string-overlay
defining must be an integer constant.

IBM1897I S Simple defining is supported only for scalars, for structures
with constant extents matching those in the base variable, and for arrays
of such scalars and structures as long as the array is not based on a
controlled variable.

The compiler must be able to evaluate the expression to an integer
constant when it scans the POSITION attribute.

IBM1904I S Variable following the free clause clause must be level 1
and either BASED or CONTROLLED.

If simple defining is not intended, specify POSITION(1) to force string
defining.

IBM1898I S The base reference in the DEFINED attribute cannot be a
built-in or type function.

A variable that is either based or controlled should immediately follow
the FREE keyword.

IBM1905I S IN or SET option option invalid after the CONTROLLED variable
in the ALLOCATE or FREE clause clause.

You can define a variable only another user variable.

IBM1899I S The base variable in the DEFINED attribute cannot be BASED,
DEFINED or CONSTANT.

Convert the DEFINED and base variables into a UNION.

An invalid option immediately follows a controlled variable in an ALLOCATE
or FREE statement.

IBM1906I S The reference qualifying an OFFSET attribute must be a scalar
AREA reference.

Using the specified AREA reference to qualify an OFFSET variable is
invalid. The reference must be scalar. The following example will issue
this message.

All statement labels in any block must be unique.

IBM1913I S ON-units may not be labeled. All such labels will be ignored.

   dcl a(10) area; dcl o     offset(a);

IBM1907I S Extents for CONTROLLED variables cannot be specified using
asterisks or REFER.

The extent specified for the controlled variable is invalid. The following
example will emit this message.

A BEGIN block or a statement associated with an ON clause may not have
a label.

IBM1914I S GOTO target must be a LABEL reference.

x in GOTO x must have type LABEL. x must not have type FORMAT.

   dcl c(*)  char(10) controlled;

IBM1915I S GOTO target must be a scalar.

IBM1908I S Extents for attribute variables cannot be specified using
asterisks or REFER.

x in GOTO x must not be an array.

IBM1916I S The PROCEDURE/ENTRY proc- name has already been defined.

Extents for AUTOMATIC and DEFINED variables must be specified by
expressions.

IBM1909I S The attribute attribute conflicts with the attribute attribute.

Sister procedures must have different names.

The named attributes, for example PARAMETER and INITIAL, are mutually
exclusive.

IBM1910I S The attributes given in the declaration for identifier conflict
with its use as a parameter.

Parameters can have no storage attributes other than
CONTROLLED. Parameters also cannot have any of the attributes BUILTIN,
CONDITION, CONSTANT, EXTERNAL, and GENERIC.

IBM1911I S Repeated specifications of the unsubscripted statement label
character are in error.

All statement labels in any block must be unique.

IBM1912I S Indices specified for the LABEL character have already been
specified.

    a: proc;
      b: proc; end; b: proc; end;
    end;

IBM1917I S Program contains no valid source lines.

The source contains either no statements or all statements that it
contains are invalid.

IBM1918I S All the names in the ORDINAL ordinal-name have been previously
declared.

None of the names in an ORDINAL should have been declared elsewhere. If
they are, perhaps the ORDINAL definition has been accidentally repeated.

IBM1919I S The EXTERNAL name string is specified for the differing names
name and name.

The exponent in a FLOAT BINARY constant may contain no more than 4 digits.

IBM1925I S Each EXTERNAL name must be used only once. So, for example,
the following declares would be illegal since the external name Z is
specified for two different names X and Y.

    dcl X fixed bin(31) ext('Z'); dcl Y fixed bin(31) ext('Z');

IBM1920I S FIXED BINARY constant contains too many digits.

The maximum precision of FIXED BINARY constants is set by the FIXEDBIN
suboption of the LIMITS compiler option.

IBM1921I S FIXED DECIMAL constant contains too many significant digits.

The maximum precision of FIXED DECIMAL constants is set by the FIXEDDEC
suboption of the LIMITS compiler option.

IBM1922I S Exponent in FLOAT BINARY constant contains more digits than
the implementation maximum.

The exponent in a FLOAT BINARY constant may contain no more than 5 digits.

IBM1923I S Mantissa in FLOAT BINARY constant contains more significant
digits than the implementation maximum.

The mantissa in a FLOAT BINARY constant may contain no more than 64
digits.

IBM1924I S Exponent in FLOAT DECIMAL constant contains more digits than
the implementation maximum.

Mantissa in FLOAT DECIMAL constant contains more significant digits than
the implementation maximum.

The mantissa in a FLOAT DECIMAL constant may contain no more than maximum
number of digits allowed on the platform.

IBM1926I S Constants must not exceed 8192 bytes.

The number of bytes used to represent a constant in your program must not
exceed 8192. This limit holds even for bit strings where the internal
representation will consume only one-eighth the number of bytes as the
external representation does.

IBM1927I S SIZE condition raised by attempt to convert source-value to
target- attributes

The source value is not in the domain of the target.

    dcl x fixed bin(15); x = 172900;

IBM1928I S ERROR raised while building CEEUOPT from PLIXOPT.

The ERROR condition was while the compiler was trying to build
CEEUOPT from PLIXOPT. There may be an error in the LE APIs used by the
compiler. Contact IBM service.  IBM1929I S

Unable to open file file-name in routine proc-name(line-number).

The compiler was unable to open the named temporary file used to
communicate with the code generation module. Check the value of the TMP
environment variable.

IBM1930I S Unable to write to file file-name .  Disk may be full.

z/Series, if your job's region size is not large enough.  Otherwise,
report the problem to IBM.

The compiler was unable to write to a temporary file used to communicate
with the code generation module. The disk to which the TMP environment
variable points may be full.

IBM1932I S Unable to close file file-name in routine
proc-name(line-number).

The compiler was unable to close the named temporary file used to
communicate with the code generation module. Check the value of the TMP
environment variable.

IBM1933I S Unable to open temporary files because the path and filename
are too long.

IBM1937I S Extents for parameters must be asterisks or restricted
expressions with computational type.

For parameters, each array bound, string length and AREA size must be
specified either with an asterisk or with a restricted expression that
has computational type.

IBM1938I S Message file file name not found.

The message must be in the current directory or in one of the directories
specified in the DPATH environment variable.

IBM1939I S Exponentiation operands must have computational type.

Shorten the name of the source file or the directory specified by the
TMP variable.

The operands in an exponentiation must have numeric or string type.

IBM1934I S If a parameter is a structure with nonconstant extents,
only matching structures are supported as arguments.

IBM1940I S note

Assign the structure to a temporary and pass the temporary, or omit the
parameter description in the entry declaration.

IBM1935I S Structure expressions as arguments are not supported for
undescribed parameters.

Assign the structure to a temporary and pass the temporary, or describe
the parameter in the entry declaration.

IBM1936I S Invocation of compiler backend ended abnormally.

The back end of the compiler either could not be found or else it detected
an error from which it could not recover. The latter problem can sometimes
occur, on Intel, if your disk is short of free space and, on the

This message is used by %NOTE statements with a return code of 12.

IBM1941I U note

This message is used by %NOTE statements with a return code of 16.

IBM1942I S The scale factor specified in BUILTIN name built-in function
must be a restricted expression with integer type.

This applies to all the precision-handling built-in functions.

IBM1943I S The number of error messages allowed by the FLAG option has
been exceeded.

Compilation will terminate when the number of messages has exceeded the
limit set in the FLAG compiler option.

IBM1944I S The precision specified in BUILTIN name built-in function
must be a restricted expression with integer type.

This applies to all the precision-handling built-in functions.

IBM1945I S Extents for BASED variable may not contain asterisks.

IBM1949I S Parameter name identifier appears more than once in parameter
list.

Each identifier in a parameter list must be unique.

    a: proc( b, c, b );

IBM1951I S storage class variables must be named.

Variables with the CONTROLLED attribute must be named, and a variable
with the EXTERNAL attribute may not have an * instead of a name unless
a name is given with the EXTERNAL attribute itself.

Extents in BASED variables must be either constants or specified with
the REFER option.

IBM1952I S IBM1946I S

Reference must be an AREA variable.

INITIAL CALL cannot be used to initialize STATIC data.

An INITIAL CALL must be evaluated at run-time; it can be used to
initialize only non-STATIC data.

The specified reference is invalid. An AREA variable is needed.

IBM1953I S IBM1947I S

The reference to the GENERIC variable GENERIC variable name cannot
be resolved.

The argument list in a GENERIC reference must match one of the generic
descriptors in one of that GENERIC's WHEN clauses. If an OTHERWISE clause
was specified, the argument list must have the same number of elements
as the OTHERWISE entry reference.

IBM1948I S condition-name condition with ONCODE=oncode-value raised
while evaluating restricted expression.

Compile-time evaluation of a restricted expression raised a condition.

    display( 1/0 );

The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do not match those
in its previous declaration.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM1954I S The base reference in the DEFINED attribute must be CONNECTED.

Variables cannot be DEFINED on NONCONNECTED references.

IBM1955I S Repeated declarations of the EXTERNAL attribute variable name
are not supported.

EXTERNAL FILE constants and CONDITIONs may be declared only once in a
compilation unit. Remove all but the outermost declare.

IBM1956I S ITERATE is valid only for iterative DO-groups.

IBM1962I S INITIAL values for type type type type name must be less
than 2G.

ITERATE is not valid inside type-I do groups.

IBM1957I S The WAIT event number specification must be computational.

ORDINAL values must fit in the range of a FIXED BIN(31) variable.

IBM1963I S BUILTIN name argument must have ORDINAL type.

The expression representing the number of items to wait for in a WAIT
statement is invalid. The expression must be of computational type. The
following example will issue this message.

An expression contains the named built-in function with an argument that
is not an ORDINAL. This message applies, for example, to the ORDINALNAME,
ORDINALPRED and ORDINALSUCC built-in functions.

   dcl e event; dcl p pointer: wait (e) (p);

IBM1958I S References in the WAIT statement must be of type EVENT.

The event reference in the WAIT statement is invalid.  It must be of
type EVENT. The following example will issue this message.

   dcl e entry; wait (e);

IBM1964I S The attributes derived from the PROCEDURE statement for
the ENTRY constant variable name do not match those in its explicit
declaration.

A label on a PROCEDURE statement constitutes a declaration for an ENTRY
constant with that name.  That name also appears in a DECLARE statement,
but the attributes in those two declarations do not match.

IBM1965I S There is more than one element named reference name in the
class structure name.

IBM1959I S Invalid aggregate expression specified in WAIT statement.

References in WAIT statements can be scalars. The only valid aggregate
reference is a simple array of events. Structures, unions, and arrays
of structures or unions would be flagged as errors.

IBM1960I S type name is not a type name.

In a declare statement that specifies TYPE x, ORDINAL x, or HANDLE x,
x must be a defined type.

IBM1961I S INITIAL values for type type type type name must be in
increasing order.

Any values specified in INITIAL clauses in an ORDINAL definition must
be in strictly increasing order.

All references must be unambiguous.

IBM1966I S There is no element named reference name in the class
structure name.

HANDLE qualified references must be explicitly declared.

IBM1967I S The ENTRY variable-name may not be used as a handle since it
does not have the RETURNS attribute.

Functions, but not subprocedures, can be used as handles (and then only
if they return a handle).

IBM1968I S The ENTRY variable-name may not be used as a handle.

x(...)=>y is invalid unless x returns a HANDLE.

IBM1969I S The variable variable-name is used as a handle, but it is
not a scalar.

The named built-in function may be used only inside procedures.

IBM1984I S File filename could not be opened.

Only scalars can be used as handles.

IBM1970I S BUILTIN name built-in function may not be used as a handle.

The named built-in function cannot be used as a handle.

IBM1971I S The GENERIC variable variable- name may not be used as
a handle.

GENERIC references may not be used as handles.

IBM1972I S variable-name may not be used as a handle.

x=>y is invalid unless x has the HANDLE attribute

IBM1976I S DBCS characters are allowed only in G and M constants.

Hex strings (strings ending in one of the suffixes X, BX, B4, GX or XN),
bit strings (strings ending in the suffix B), and character strings not
ending in the suffix M must contain only SBCS characters.

IBM1977I S SBCS characters are not allowed in G constants.

Mixed SBCS and DBCS is allowed only in M constants.

IBM1978I S Invalid use of SBCS encoded as DBCS.

The named file could not be opened. Make sure that the file is named
correctly, that it exists, that it has the proper attributes and that
you have the needed permissions to access it.

IBM1985I S File filename could not be opened.  C-library-message

The named file could not be opened. Make sure that the file is named
correctly, that it exists, that it has the proper attributes and that
you have the needed permissions to access it. The accompanying C library
message may help identify the problem.

IBM1986I S A system or user abend has occurred.

This error can occur, for example. when writing the MDECK to a SYSPUNCH
dataset that is too small or when writing to one of the other compiler
output datasets when they are too small. It would probably be useful to
examine the JES log.

IBM1987I S File filename could not be opened because too many files have
been opened.

The maximum number of open files has been reached.  On some platforms,
there is a system limit on the number of open files, but the compiler
also has a limit of 2047 include files.

IBM1988I S File filename could not be opened due to an access violation.

Either the file is in use or you tried to open a file for which you do
not have sufficient privilege.

Outside of comments, SBCS can be encoded as DBCS only as part of an
identifier.

IBM1989I S File name or extension for filename is too long.

IBM1981I S BUILTIN function may not be used outside a PROCEDURE.

The length of the file name or extension is greater than the maximum
allowed.

IBM1990I S File name filename has invalid format.

Apart from z/OS UNIX, file names should not contain quotes. Under
z/OS UNIX, if the file name does contain quotes, it should specify a
PDS member.

IBM1997I S Internal compiler error: no WHEN clause satisfied within
module name

This message indicates that there is an error in the front end of the
compiler. Please report the problem to IBM.  IBM1998I S

Internal compiler error: protection exception in module name

IBM1992I S A file name must be specified.

The command syntax is:

This message indicates that there is an error in the front end of the
compiler. Please report the problem to IBM.  PLI {d:}{path}filename{.ext}
{( options}

IBM1993I S Compilation terminated by ATTENTION condition.

If you hit CTL-BRK during the compilation, the compilation will stop.

IBM1994I S Internal compiler error: storage header has been overwritten

This message indicates that there is an error in the front end of the
compiler. Please report the problem to IBM.  IBM1995I S

Internal compiler error: storage tail has been overwritten.

IBM1999I S note

This message indicates that there is an error in the back end of the
compiler. Please report the problem to IBM.  IBM2000I S

Internal compiler error: assertion failed on line source line in procedure
name in package name >> extra text

This message indicates that there is an error in the front end of the
compiler. Report the problem to IBM.

IBM2001I S A LICENSE REQUEST WAS DENIED FOR PL/I, PID 5655- B22. THE
REQUEST ENDED WITH STATUS CODE STATUS CODE AND RETURN CODE RETURN CODE.
THE COMPILATION WILL BE TERMINATED.

This message indicates that there is an error in the front end of the
compiler. Please report the problem to IBM.  IBM1996I S

Internal compiler error: free amount free request size does not match
allocated size allocated size.

This message indicates that there is an error in the front end of the
compiler. Please report the problem to IBM.  IBM License Manager is
installed on your system, but the request to verify that you have a
license to use the PL/I compiler has failed.

IBM2002I S Close of file filename failed. There may be a space problem.

An error has occurred while attempting to close a file.

IBM2003I S Write to file filename failed. There may be a space problem.

An error has occurred while attempting to write to a file.

Specify the LIMITED attribute in the declare for the ENTRY VARIABLE.

IBM2004I S ATTACH reference must be declared with either a null argument
list or with an argument list specifying only one argument.

IBM2011I S ATTACH reference, if it has an argument, must declare that
argument as POINTER BYVALUE.

If the ATTACH reference is declared without an argument list, change the
declare to specify a null argument list by adding a pair of parentheses.

IBM2005I S ATTACH reference must be an ENTRY reference.

No other argument types are support in ATTACH statements.

IBM2012I S The attribute keyword attribute is invalid in an ALIAS
definition.

GENERIC references and built-in subroutines may not be attached.

IBM2006I S ATTACH reference cannot be a function reference.

The specified attribute must not be used in a DEFINE ALIAS statement. This
includes attributes such as ASSIGNABLE, but, as in RETURNS descriptors,
the attributes STRUCTURE, UNION and DIMENSION are not permitted in ALIAS
definitions. Hence, the following are invalid:

    define alias array (10) fixed bin;

An ATTACH reference must not have the RETURNS attribute, even if the
value returned is an ENTRY.

    define alias point 1, 2 fixed bin, 2 fixed
bin;

IBM2007I S ATTACH reference must use LINKAGE(SYSTEM).

Unless the default linkage is overridden, OPTIONS(LINKAGE(SYSTEM))
must be specified on the declare for the ATTACH reference.

IBM2008I S ATTACH reference cannot be FETCHABLE.

IBM2013I S Only one description is allowed in an ALIAS definition.

The syntax allows the name in an alias definition to be followed by a
description list, but that description list must consist of exactly one
description. The following is invalid:

    define alias x fixed bin, float bin;

An ATTACH reference may not be used in a FETCH or RELEASE statement.

IBM2009I S ATTACH reference cannot be a nested PROCEDURE.

An ATTACH reference must be a level-1 procedure, although it does need
to be external.

IBM2010I S ATTACH reference, if an ENTRY variable, must be a LIMITED
ENTRY.

IBM2014I S Extents in type descriptors must be constant.

In ALIAS and STRUCTURE definitions, each string length and AREA size
must be specified with a restricted expression. Like RETURNS descriptors,
asterisks and non-constant expressions are not permitted.

IBM2015I S VALUE attribute conflicts with data type.

The VALUE attribute is allowed only with computational data types as
well as pointer, offset, handle and ordinal.

Functions, but not subprocedures, can be used as typed structure
qualifiers (and then only if they return a typed structure).

IBM2016I S The VALUE attribute is not allowed with typed structures.

IBM2023I S The ENTRY variable-name may not be used as a typed structure
qualifier.

The VALUE attribute is not allowed with typed structures.

x(...)=>y is invalid unless x returns a typed structure.

IBM2017I S INITIAL TO is valid only for NATIVE POINTER.

IBM2024I S INITIAL TO is not valid for NONNATIVE POINTERs. It is also
invalid for non-POINTERs since they cannot be assigned addresses.

The array variable variable-name may be used as a typed structure
qualifier only if it is completely subscripted before its dot
qualification.

IBM2018I S INITIAL TO is supported only for STATIC variables.

INITIAL TO is not supported for variables belonging to any storage class
other than STATIC.

IBM2019I S Unsupported LINKAGE used with the LIST attribute.

Specify OPTIONS(LINKAGE(OPTLINK)) or, on WINDOWS, OPTIONS(LINKAGE(CDECL))
on the PROCEDURE or ENTRY having a parameter with the LIST attribute
and then recompile.

IBM2020I S There is more than one element named reference name in the
typed structure structure name.

All references must be unambiguous.

IBM2021I S There is no element named reference name in the structure
structure name.

For instance, if x is an array of structure t with member m, x.m(2)
is invalid. However, x(2).m is valid.

IBM2025I S BUILTIN name built-in function may not be used as a typed
structure qualifier.

The named built-in function cannot be used as a typed structure qualifier.

IBM2026I S The GENERIC variable variable- name may not be used as a
typed structure qualifier.

GENERIC references may not be used as typed structure qualifiers.

IBM2027I S variable-name may not be used as a structure qualifier.

x.y is invalid unless x is a structure, a union or a function returning
a typed structure.

IBM2028I S TYPEs must be defined before their use.

All structure references must be explicitly declared.

IBM2022I S The ENTRY variable-name may not be used as a typed structure
qualifier since it does not have the RETURNS attribute.

The DEFINE STRUCTURE or DEFINE ALIAS statement for a type x must precede
any of use of x as attribute type. The following two statements should
be in the opposite order.

    dcl x type point;

    define structure
      1 point,
        2 x  fixed bin(31), 2 y  fixed bin(31);

IBM2029I S A DEFINE STRUCTURE statement must consist of a level one
structure name optionally followed by its substructures. Use DEFINE
ALIAS to set a name as a synonym for a data type.

list must consist of exactly one structure description.  The following
is invalid:

    define structure
      1 point,
        2 x  fixed bin(31), 2 y  fixed bin(31),
      1 rectangle,
        2 upper_left   type point, 2 lower_right  type point;

IBM2034I S The argument to the type function type function must be an
ordinal type name.

A DEFINE STRUCTURE statement can specify just a level 1 name only if
there no other attributes specified.  The following are invalid

The argument to the type functions FIRST and LAST must be an unambiguous
type name, and that type must be an ordinal type.

    define structure 1 int fixed bin;

    define structure 1 a type b;

IBM2030I S INITIAL attribute is invalid in structure definitions.

Defined structure types must be initialized via assignments.

IBM2035I S The argument to the type function type function must be a
structure type name.

The argument to the type function NEW must be an unambiguous type name,
and that type must be a structure type.

IBM2036I S The second argument to the type function type function must
have locator type.

IBM2031I S Storage attributes are invalid in structure definition.

Storage attributes, such as AUTOMATIC and BYADDR, must be specified with
variables declared with structure type.

IBM2032I S DEFINE STRUCTURE may not specify an array of structures.

The second argument to the BIND type function must be a pointer or offset
value that is to be converted to a handle to the structure type named
as the first argument.

IBM2037I S The first argument to the type function type function must
be a structure type name.

The level 1 name in a structure definition may not have the DIMENSION
attribute.

The first argument to the type functions BIND must be an unambiguous
type name, and that type must be a structure type.

IBM2033I S Only one description is allowed in a structure definition.

IBM2038I S BUILTIN name argument must have HANDLE type.

The syntax allows the name in a structure definition to be followed by
a description list, but that description

An expression contains the named built-in function with an argument that
is not a HANDLE.

IBM2039I S Argument to variable name pseudovariable must be a HANDLE.

The TYPE pseudovariable can be applied only to HANDLEs.

                 fixed bin(31) byaddr )
          returns( pointer );

IBM2045I S The free storage function to BUILTIN name must be a LIMITED
ENTRY with LINKAGE(OPTLINK) and an appropriate entry description list.

IBM2040I S The argument to the type function type function must be a
defined type.

The function should be declared as

The first argument to the type function SIZE must be the unambiguous
name of a defined type.

IBM2041I S The first argument to the type function type function must
be a defined type.

  dcl free entry( pointer byvalue,
                  pointer byvalue, fixed bin(31) byvalue );

IBM2046I S OPTIONS(NODESCRIPTOR) is required if the last parameter to
an ENTRY or PROC has the LIST attribute.

The first argument to the type function CAST must be the unambiguous
name of a defined type.

IBM2042I S The second argument to the type function type function must
be a scalar.

If an entry or procedure has a variable number of arguments in
imitation of C, i.e. if its last parameter has the LIST attribute,
then OPTIONS(NODESCRIPTOR) must be specified (and valid).

The second argument to the type function CAST must be a scalar.

IBM2043I S The second argument to the type function type function must
have the same size as the first argument.

The second argument to the type function CAST must have the same size
as the size of the type that is the first argument.

IBM2044I S The get storage function to BUILTIN name must be a LIMITED
ENTRY with LINKAGE(OPTLINK) and an appropriate entry description list.

The function should be declared as

  dcl get entry( pointer byvalue,
                 fixed bin(31) byaddr,

IBM2047I S The VARGLIST built-in function may be used only inside
PROCEDUREs whose last parameter had the LIST attribute.

The VARGLIST built-in function obtains the address of the variable
argument list passed to procedures whose last parameter had the LIST
attribute. It may not be used in subprocedures of such routines or in
procedures having either no parameters or having no parameter declared
with the LIST attribute.

IBM2048I S The LIST attribute may be specified only on non-nested
PROCEDUREs, external entry constants, and limited entry variables.

The LIST attribute causes a variable argument list to be built, and
such argument lists are permitted neither with nested procedures nor
with entry variables declared without the LIMITED attribute.

IBM2049I S The LIST attribute may be specified only on the last element
of an entry description list.

The LIST attribute indicates that zero or more parameters may be specified
after it, but those parameters may not be described.

IBM2055I S An ENTRY statement must receive all parameters BYADDR.

IBM2050I S Descriptors are supported for Fortran only for scalar
character strings.

Either BYADDR must be specified in the declares for the parameters,
or the BYADDR suboption of the DEFAULT statement must be in effect.

If OPTIONS( FORTRAN DESCRIPTOR ) applies, all parameters other than
character strings must have constant extents.

IBM2051I S Descriptors are not supported for Fortran for routines defined
by or containing ENTRY statements.

IBM2056I S ENTRY statement is not allowed in DO loops.

ENTRY statements are allowed in non-iterative DO groups, but not in
iterative DO loops.

IBM2057I S RETURN statement is invalid inside a BEGIN in a PROCEDURE
that contains ENTRY statements.

If OPTIONS( FORTRAN DESCRIPTOR ) applies to an ENTRY statement or to
a procedure containing an ENTRY statement, all parameters must have
constant extents.

A RETURN statement is valid inside a BEGIN block only if the PROCEDURE
enclosing that BEGIN block contains no ENTRY statements.

IBM2052I S A function defined by a PROCEDURE containing ENTRY statements
must return aggregate values BYADDR.

IBM2058I S In a PROCEDURE without the RETURNS option, any ENTRY statement
must use BYADDR for its RETURNS value.

Either BYADDR must be specified in the RETURNS option of the PROCEDURE
statement, or the RETURNS(BYADDR) suboption of the DEFAULT statement
must be in effect.

Either BYADDR must be specified in the RETURNS option of the ENTRY
statement, or the RETURNS(BYADDR) suboption of the DEFAULT statement
must be in effect.

IBM2053I S A function defined by an ENTRY statement must return aggregate
values BYADDR.

IBM2059I S OPTIONS(FORTRAN) is invalid if any parameters are UNALIGNED
BIT.

Either BYADDR must be specified in the RETURNS option of the ENTRY
statement, or the RETURNS(BYADDR) suboption of the DEFAULT statement
must be in effect.

IBM2054I S A PROCEDURE containing ENTRY statements must receive all non-
pointer parameters BYADDR.

Only ALIGNED BIT strings with constant length are valid with
OPTIONS(FORTRAN).

IBM2060I S Attributes may not be specified in ALLOCATEs of BASED
variables.

Attributes may be specified only in ALLOCATEs of CONTROLLED variables.

Either BYADDR must be specified in the declares for the parameters,
or the BYADDR suboption of the DEFAULT statement must be in effect.

IBM2061I S Attributes specified for variable- name in ALLOCATE statement
do not match those in its declaration.

An attribute, such as CHARACTER, may be specified in an ALLOCATE statement
only if it is also specified in the declaration of the variable to
be allocated.

IBM2062I S Structuring specified in ALLOCATE of variable-name does not
match that in its declaration.

A ENTRY type or argument used with the type function CAST must have the
attribute LIMITED.

IBM2076I S FLOAT types and arguments in type function must be NATIVE REAL.

In an ALLOCATE statement for a structure, all the levels specified in
its declaration must be specified, and no new levels may be specified.

IBM2063I S Specification of extent for variable-name in ALLOCATE statement
is invalid since it was declared with a constant extent.

A FLOAT type or argument used with the type function CAST must have the
attributes NATIVE REAL.

IBM2077I S FIXED BIN types and arguments in type function must be REAL
with scale factor zero.

A FIXED BIN type or argument used with the type function CAST must have
the attributes REAL PRECISION(p,0).

An attribute, such as CHARACTER, may be specified in an ALLOCATE statement
only if it is also specified in the declaration of the variable to be
allocated with either an asterisk or a non-constant expression.

IBM2078I S Types with the attributes attributes are not supported as
the target of the type function function.

IBM2064I S The extent specified for the lower bound for dimension
dimension-value of variable-name in ALLOCATE statement is invalid since
that variable was declared with a different constant extent.

If a bound for a CONTROLLED variable is declared as a constant, then it
must be specified as the same constant value in any ALLOCATE statement
for that variable.

IBM2065I S The extent specified for the upper bound for dimension
dimension-value of variable-name in ALLOCATE statement is invalid since
that variable was declared with a different constant extent.

The first argument to the type function CAST must be a type with one
of the following sets of attributes: REAL FIXED BIN(p,0) or NATIVE
REAL FLOAT.

IBM2079I S Arguments with the attributes attributes are not supported
as the source in the type function function.

The second argument to the type function CAST must have one of the
following sets of attributes: REAL FIXED BIN(p,0) or NATIVE REAL FLOAT.

IBM2080I S DATE pattern is invalid.

If a bound for a CONTROLLED variable is declared as a constant, then it
must be specified as the same constant value in any ALLOCATE statement
for that variable.

See the Language Reference Manual for a list of the supported DATE
patterns.

IBM2081I S DATE attribute is valid only with NONVARYING CHARACTER,
FIXED DECIMAL and arithmetic PICTURE.

IBM2075I S ENTRY types and arguments in type function must be LIMITED.

The DATE attribute cannot be used on any other than the named types.

IBM2082I S DATE attribute conflicts with non- zero scale factor.

The DATE attribute can be used on a numeric only if it has a scale factor
of zero.

IBM2083I S DATE attribute conflicts with COMPLEX attribute.

The DATE attribute can be used on a numeric only if it is REAL.

IBM2084I S DATE attribute conflicts with PICTURE string containing
characters other than 9.

All lines in any response file must contain no more than 100 characters.

IBM2090I S The keyword statement cannot be used under SYSTEM(CICS).

The named statement cannot be used under CICS.

IBM2091I S DISPLAY with REPLY cannot be used under SYSTEM(CICS).

DISPLAY with REPLY cannot be used under CICS.

IBM2092I S The BUILTIN name built-in function cannot be used under
SYSTEM(CICS).

The DATE attribute can be used on a PICTURE only if the PICTURE consists
entirely of 9's.

IBM2085I S Length of DATE pattern and base precision do not match.

The DATE attribute can be used on a numeric only if its precision equals
the length of the DATE pattern.

IBM2086I S Length of DATE pattern and base length do not match.

The DATE attribute can be used on a string only if its length equals
the length of the DATE pattern.

IBM2087I S DATE attribute conflicts with adjustable length.

The DATE attribute can be used on a string only if the string is declared
with a constant length.

IBM2088I S Response file is too large. Excess will be ignored.

The options string built from the response file must be less than 32767
characters long.

IBM2089I S Line in response file is longer than 100 characters. That
line and rest of file will be ignored.

The named built-in function cannot be used under CICS.

IBM2093I S The keyword statement cannot be used under SYSTEM(CICS)
except with SYSPRINT.

The named I/O statement cannot be used under CICS unless the file used
in the statement is SYSPRINT.

IBM2094I S Source in CAST to FLOAT must be FLOAT, FIXED or ORDINAL.

The source in a CAST to a FLOAT must be FLOAT, FIXED or ORDINAL.

IBM2095I S Target in CAST from FLOAT must be FLOAT, FIXED BIN or ORDINAL.

The target in a CAST from a FLOAT must be FLOAT, FIXED BIN or ORDINAL.

IBM2096I S Target in CAST from FIXED DEC must be FLOAT, FIXED BIN
or ORDINAL.

The target in a CAST from a FIXED DEC must be FLOAT, FIXED BIN or ORDINAL.

IBM2097I S FIXED DEC types and arguments in type function must be REAL
with non-negative scale factor.

A FIXED DEC type or argument used with the type function CAST must have
the attributes REAL PRECISION(p,q) with p >= q and q >= 0.

IBM2098I S Source in CAST to FIXED DEC must be FLOAT, FIXED or ORDINAL.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2103I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do not
match those in its previous declaration. Alignment does not match.

The source in a CAST to a FIXED DEC must be FLOAT, FIXED or ORDINAL.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2099I S CASEX strings must have the same length.

IBM2104I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do
not match those in its previous declaration. Number and attributes of
structure members do not match.

The two strings in the CASEX option must have the same length. The
second argument is the uppercase value of the first. If a character in
the first string does not have an uppercase value, use the character
itself as the uppercase value.

IBM2100I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do not
match those in its previous declaration. The ORDINAL types do not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2101I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do not
match those in its previous declaration. The HANDLE types do not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2102I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do not
match those in its previous declaration. The STRUCTURE types do not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2105I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do not
match those in its previous declaration. The number of dimensions do
not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2106I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do not
match those in its previous declaration. Lower bounds do not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2107I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do not
match those in its previous declaration. Upper bounds do not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2108I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do not
match those in its previous declaration. RETURNS attributes do not match.

IBM2113I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do not
match those in its previous declaration. BYVALUE and BYADDR attributes
in parameter parameter-number do not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2109I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do not
match those in its previous declaration. BYVALUE and BYADDR attributes
in RETURNS do not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2110I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do not
match those in its previous declaration. LINKAGE values do not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2111I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do not
match those in its previous declaration. OPTIONS values do not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2114I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do not
match those in its previous declaration. The number of dimensions for
parameter parameter-number do not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2115I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do
not match those in its previous declaration. Lower bounds for parameter
parameter-number do not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2116I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do
not match those in its previous declaration. Upper bounds for parameter
parameter-number do not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2112I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do not
match those in its previous declaration. Parameter counts do not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2117I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do

not match those in its previous declaration. Alignment of parameter
parameter-number does not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2118I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do
not match those in its previous declaration. Number and attributes of
structure members in parameter parameter-number do not match.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2119I S The attributes of the EXTERNAL variable variable name do
not match those in its previous declaration. Attributes of parameter
parameter-number do not match.

    call x( a );

IBM2122I S User exit routine addresses are invalid. Check that the user
exit routine is a PACKAGE that exports only IBMUEXIT.

The IBMUEXIT routine should have a PACKAGE statement that specifies
EXPORTS( IBMUEXIT ) and not EXPORTS( * ).

IBM2123I S When expanded, DEFINE STRUCTURE type would have an array with
more than 15 total dimensions.

The total number of dimensions allowed in a DEFINED STRUCTURE type used
in XMLCHAR must not exceed 15.

IBM2124I S When expanded, DEFINE STRUCTURE type would contain more than
15 logical levels.

The total number of logical levels allowed in a DEFINED STRUCTURE type
used in XMLCHAR must not exceed 15.

EXTERNAL variables can be declared in more than one procedure in a
compilation unit, but the attributes in those declarations must match.

IBM2125I S variable-name is a typed structure and hence cannot be used
in GET DATA.

IBM2120I S AREAs are not supported in RETURNS.

But an AREA may be output parameter.

IBM2121I S Argument number argument- number in ENTRY reference entry
name must have the same size as the corresponding parameter.

The use of DEFINE STRUCTURE types is not supported in GET DATA statements.

      define structure
        1 a,
          2 a1 fixed bin(31), 2 a2 fixed bin(31);

      dcl x type a;

      get skip data( x );

For a AREA parameter declared with constant size, any corresponding
argument must have equal constant size. Dummy AREA arguments are not
supported in this scenario.

IBM2126I S variable-name is a member of a typed structure and hence
cannot be used in data directed I/O.

    dcl x entry( area(10000) ); dcl a area(8000) );

The use of members of DEFINE STRUCTURE types is not supported in data
directed I/O statements.

example, the first GENERIC reference below is invalid, while the second
is ok.

      define structure
        1 a,
          2 a1 fixed bin(31), 2 a2 fixed bin(31);

      dcl x type a;

      x.a1 = 17; x.a2 = 29;

      put skip data( x.a );

IBM2127I S The ENTRY named ENTRY variable name matches the reference
to the GENERIC variable GENERIC variable name, but while the GENERIC
reference is used as a function, the matching ENTRY does not have the
RETURNS attribute.

A match for the GENERIC reference has been found, but the match is not
suitable because while the GENERIC reference is used as a function,
the matching ENTRY is not a function. For example, the first GENERIC
reference below is invalid, while the second is ok.

    dcl e1 entry( fixed bin ); dcl e2 entry( fixed bin, fixed bin )
returns( fixed bin );
    dcl gp generic( e1 when( * ),
                    e2 when( *, * ) );

    rc = gp( 0 );

    rc = gp( 0, 0 );

IBM2128I S The ENTRY named ENTRY variable name matches the reference
to the GENERIC variable GENERIC variable name, but while the GENERIC
reference is used as a function acting as a locator qualifier, the
matching ENTRY does not return a POINTER.

A match for the GENERIC reference has been found, but the match is
not suitable because while the GENERIC reference is used as a locator,
the matching ENTRY is not a function returning a POINTER. For

    dcl f1 entry( fixed bin ) returns( fixed
bin );
    dcl f2 entry( fixed bin, fixed bin )
returns( pointer );
    dcl bx based fixed bin; dcl gf generic( f1 when( * ),
                    f2 when( *, * ) );

    rc = gf( 0 )->bx;

    rc = gf( 0, 0 )->bx;

IBM2129I S The ENTRY named ENTRY variable name matches the reference
to the GENERIC variable GENERIC variable name, but while the GENERIC
reference is used as a repeating function reference, the matching ENTRY
cannot be so used.

A match for the GENERIC reference has been found, but the match is not
suitable because while the GENERIC reference is used as a function whose
return value is a function that is invoked (and so on, as the number
of argument lists mandates), the matching ENTRY cannot be so used. For
example, the first GENERIC reference below is invalid, while the second
is ok.

    dcl x1 entry( fixed bin )
           returns( entry );
    dcl x2 entry( fixed bin, fixed bin )
           returns( entry returns( fixed
bin ) );
    dcl gx generic( x1 when( * ),
                    x2 when( *, * ) );

    rc = gx( 0 )();

    rc = gx( 0, 0 )();

IBM2130I S iSUB defining is not valid with the POSITION attribute.

The POSITION attribute can be used only with string overlay defining.

    dcl b(4) char(2) pos(2) def( a(1sub,1sub) );

IBM2131I S In iSUB defining, the base and DEFINED variables must match.

IBM2136I S The defined and base arrays in iSUB defining must have
identical attributes apart from the dimension attribute.

The number of indices specified for the LABEL identifier does not match
the number previously specified.

The number of indices given for an element of a label constant array
must not vary.

    dcl a(4) fixed bin(31); dcl b(4) fixed bin(15) def( a(1sub,1sub) );

    a(1,1): ....  a(1,2): ....  a(3): ....

IBM2132I S The i in an iSUB reference must not exceed the dimensionality
of the DEFINED variable.

IBM2137I S The i in an iSUB reference must refer to a subscript of
the DEFINED variable and hence must not be greater than the number of
dimensions for that variable.

Indices have been specified for the LABEL identifier when it was
previously specified without indices.

A label constant cannot be subscripted if its first use contains no
subscripts.

    dcl a(4,4) fixed bin(31); dcl b(4) fixed bin(15) def( a(1sub,2sub) );

IBM2133I S An iSUB variable cannot be defined on a cross-section of
its base.

    a: ....  a(3): ....

IBM2138I S In an iSUB variable, no asterisks may appear in the
specification of the base array.

Indices have not been specified for the LABEL identifier when it was
previously specified with indices.

    dcl a(4,4) fixed bin(31); dcl b(4) fixed bin(15) def( a(1sub,*) );

A label constant must be subscripted if its first use contains subscripts.

IBM2134I S iSUB defining is supported only for arrays of scalars.

    a(3): ....  a: ....

IBM2139I S The Language Enviroment run- time is not current enough.

iSUB defining is not supported for structures and unions.

IBM2135I S DFT(DESCLIST) conflicts with CMPAT(cmpat-suboption).

The compiler requires that you use z/OS Language Environment V2 R1
or later.

If CMPAT(V1) or CMPAT(V2) is specified, then DFT(DESCLOCATOR) must be
in effect (as it is by default on z/OS).

IBM2140I S Length of second argument to the REPLACEBY2 built-in function
must be twice that of the third.

The second argument to the REPLACEBY2 built-in function provides the set
of pairs of characters which are to replace the corresponding characters
in the third argument, and hence the length of the second string must
be twice that of the third.

IBM2141I S First argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function must be
a structure.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must be a LIMITED ENTRY. See the Programming Guide for
more details.

IBM2146I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function must return BYVALUE a NATIVE FIXED BIN(31).

The first argument to the named built-in subroutine must be a structure.

IBM2142I S Event structure argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function
has too few elements.

The first argument to the named built-in subroutine must be a structure
supplying the event handlers for the SAX parser, and that structure must
have exactly the right number of members. See the Programming Guide for
more details.

IBM2143I S Event structure argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function
has too many elements.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers
for the SAX parser must be a function returning BYVALUE a NATIVE FIXED
BIN(31). See the Programming Guide for more details.

IBM2147I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function must have a non-empty entry description
list.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must have a non- empty entry description list. See the
Programming Guide for more details.

The first argument to the named built-in subroutine must be a structure
supplying the event handlers for the SAX parser, and that structure must
have exactly the right number of members. See the Programming Guide for
more details.

IBM2144I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function is not a scalar.

The first argument to the named built-in subroutine must be a structure
supplying the event handlers for the SAX parser, and each element of that
structure must be a scalar. See the Programming Guide for more details.

IBM2145I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function must be a LIMITED ENTRY.

IBM2148I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to
the BUILTIN name built-in function has a parameter count of specified-
parm-count when the correct parameter count is required-parm- count .

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers
for the SAX parser must have the correct number of parameters. See the
Programming Guide for more details.

IBM2149I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function must have a BYVALUE POINTER as its first
parameter.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must have a BYVALUE POINTER as its first parameter. See
the Programming Guide for more details.

IBM2150I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to
the BUILTIN name built-in function must have a BYVALUE POINTER as its
second parameter.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must have a BYVALUE POINTER as its second parameter. See
the Programming Guide for more details.

IBM2151I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function must have a BYVALUE NATIVE FIXED BIN(31)
as its third parameter.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must have a BYVALUE NATIVE FIXED BIN(31) as its third
parameter. See the Programming Guide for more details.

IBM2152I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to
the BUILTIN name built-in function must have a BYVALUE POINTER as its
fourth parameter.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must have a BYVALUE POINTER as its fourth parameter. See
the Programming Guide for more details.

IBM2153I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function must have a BYVALUE NATIVE FIXED BIN(31)
as its fifth parameter.

must have a BYVALUE POINTER as its second parameter.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must have a BYVALUE POINTER as its second parameter. See
the Programming Guide for more details.

IBM2155I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function must have a BYVALUE NATIVE FIXED BIN(31)
as its fourth parameter.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must have a BYVALUE NATIVE FIXED BIN(31) as its fourth
parameter. See the Programming Guide for more details.

IBM2156I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function must have a BYVALUE NATIVE FIXED BIN(31)
as its second parameter.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must have a BYVALUE NATIVE FIXED BIN(31) as its second
parameter. See the Programming Guide for more details.

IBM2157I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function must have a BYVALUE CHAR(1) or BYVALUE
WCHAR(1) as its second parameter.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers
for the SAX parser must have a BYVALUE NATIVE FIXED BIN(31) as its
fifth parameter.  See the Programming Guide for more details.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must have a BYVALUE CHAR (or BYVALUE WIDECHAR) of length
one as its second parameter. See the Programming Guide for more details.

IBM2154I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function

IBM2158I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function has the wrong linkage.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must have the PL/I default linkage. See the Programming
Guide for more details.

IBM2159I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function must have the NODESCRIPTOR option.

must not contain any unnamed substructures.

The XMLCHAR built-in function cannot be applied to structures containing
substructures using an asterisk as a name.

IBM2165I S PRV support is provided only if the LIMITS(EXTNAME(7)) option
is in effect.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must have the NODESCRIPTOR option. See the Programming
Guide for more details.

IBM2160I S All members of the input structure to the BUILTIN name built-in
function must have computational type.

The XMLCHAR built-in function cannot be applied to structures containing
noncomputational types.

IBM2161I S The input structure to the BUILTIN name built-in function
must not be a UNION or contain any UNIONs.

The XMLCHAR built-in function cannot be applied to unions or to structures
containing unions.

IBM2162I S The input structure to the BUILTIN name built-in function
must not contain any GRAPHIC elements.

The XMLCHAR built-in function cannot be applied to structures containing
any GRAPHIC data.

IBM2163I S The input structure to the BUILTIN name built-in function
must not contain any UTF-16 elements.

The XMLCHAR built-in function cannot be applied to structures containing
any WIDECHAR or WIDEPIC data.

IBM2164I S The input structure to the BUILTIN name built-in function

Support for long external names is incompatible with support for using
the PRV to address CONTROLLED variables.

IBM2166I S PRV support is provided only if the NORENT option is in effect.

Support for the RENT option is incompatible with support for using the
PRV to address CONTROLLED variables.

IBM2167I S PRV support is provided only if the CMPAT(V2) or CMPAT(V3)
option is in effect.

Support for the CMPAT(LE) option is incompatible with support for using
the PRV to address CONTROLLED variables.

IBM2168I S Support for EBCDIC encoding with JSON is provided only if
both the DFT(EBCDIC) is in effect and the option CODEPAGE specifies an
EBCDIC codepage.

The JSON(ENCODING(EBCDIC)) option is supported when either the program's
data contents or the program's variable names are held in ASCII.

IBM2170I S Too many INTERNAL CONTROLLED variables.

When using the PRV to address CONTROLLED variables, there may be no more
than 568 INTERNAL CONTROLLED variables.

IBM2171I S Under the NOWRITABLE option, no FETCHABLE ENTRY may be declared
at the PACKAGE level.

Under the NOWRITABLE option, every FETCHABLE ENTRY constant must be
declared inside a PROCEDURE.

IBM2172I S Under the NOWRITABLE option, no FILE CONSTANT may be declared
at the PACKAGE level.

The named file is the file intended to be used as the SYSADATA file,
but such a file must not be a member of a PDS.

IBM2178I S INCLUDE statements are not supported when the LINEDIR option
is in effect.

When the LINEDIR option is in effect, your source must contain no
INCLUDE statements.

IBM2179I S Under the NOWRITABLE option, every FILE CONSTANT must be
declared inside a PROCEDURE.

IBM2173I S Under the NOWRITABLE option, no CONTROLLED may be declared
at the PACKAGE level.

Under the NOWRITABLE option, every CONTROLLED variable must be declared
inside a PROCEDURE.

IBM2174I S Result of REPLACEBY2 is too long.

There is too little room between the margins for the LINE directive.
The PPTRACE option will be turned off.

The %LINE directive generated by the PPTRACE must fit on one line. You
must either make the margins wide enough to allow this or make the source
file names short enough.

IBM2180I S Use of the KEYED DIRECT file filename in a keyword statement
without a KEY/KEYFROM clause is invalid.

The length of the string literal produced by applying the REPLACEBY2
built-in function to 3 literals must not be greater than the maximum
allowed for a character literal.

Any input/output operation using a KEYED DIRECT file must include the
key of the record to which the operation is to be applied.

IBM2175I S The second and third arguments to REPLACEBY2 must be restricted
expressions.

IBM2181I S First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
type CHARACTER.

The REPLACEBY2 built-in function currently supports only second and
third arguments that have a length and value known at compile time.

IBM2176I S The result of the BUILTIN name built-in function would require
more than 32767 bytes.

This applies to the PICSPEC built-in function, for example.

IBM2182I S Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built-in
function must be a constant.

The HEX and HEXIMAGE built-in functions cannot be applied to strings
using more than 16383 bytes of storage.

IBM2177I S The file filename is a PDS member and hence cannot be used
for SYSADATA.

The specified argument to the named built-in function must be a restricted
expression. This applies to second argument to the PICSPEC built-in
function, for example.

IBM2183I S The first argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have

constant length equal to that of the second argument.

IBM2189I S Under CMPAT(V2) and CMPAT(LE), bounds must not be greater
than +2147483647.

This applies to the PICSPEC built-in function, for example.

IBM2184I S Compiler input files must have less then 1000000 lines.

Under CMPAT(V2) and CMPAT(LE), bounds must be between -2147483648 and
+2147483647.

IBM2190I S Under CMPAT(V2) and CMPAT(LE), bounds must not be less than
-2147483648.

Break up the source files into smaller files.

IBM2185I S Argument to BUILTIN name built- in function must have type
REAL DECIMAL FLOAT, and the DFP option must be in effect.

This applies to the ISFINITE and similar built-in functions.

IBM2186I S BUILTIN name is not supported for DFP.

The named built-in function is not supported for float using DFP. This
message applies, for instance, to the SQRTF built-in functions

IBM2187I S The exponent in the literal value is too large for DECIMAL
FLOAT with precision precision.

A DFP literal value when adjusted to have no decimal point (e.g. 3.14E0
would be adjusted to 314E-2) must have an exponent no larger than the
maximum for its precision. For precision <= 7, the maximum is 90. For 7
< precision <= 16, the maximum is 369. For 16 < precision, the maximum
is 6111.

IBM2188I S The exponent in the literal value is too small for DECIMAL
FLOAT with precision precision.

A DFP literal value when adjusted to have no decimal point (e.g. 3.14E0
would be adjusted to 314E-2) must have an exponent no smaller than the
minimum for its precision. For precision <= 7, the minimum is -95. For 7
< precision <= 16, the minimum is -383. For 16 < precision, the minimum
is -6143.

Under CMPAT(V2) and CMPAT(LE), bounds must be between -2147483648 and
+2147483647.

IBM2191I S No valid character specified in the option option.

You must specify at least one valid character in each of the OR, NOT
and QUOTE or NAMES compiler options.

IBM2192I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function must have a BYVALUE POINTER as parameter
number parameter- number .

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must have a BYVALUE POINTER in the specified parameter
position. See the Programming Guide for more details.

IBM2193I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function must have a BYVALUE NATIVE FIXED BIN(31)
as parameter number parameter-number .

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must have a BYVALUE NATIVE FIXED BIN(31) in the specified
parameter position. See the Programming Guide for more details.

IBM2194I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function must have a BYADDR POINTER

as parameter number parameter- number .

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must have a BYADDR POINTER in the specified parameter
position.  See the Programming Guide for more details.

The compiler backend requires the XPLINK(ON) option to be in effect.

IBM2200I S DFP conversion from source type to target type failed with
an operation exception. The most likely cause for this is lack of DFP
hardware.

IBM2195I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function must have a BYADDR NATIVE FIXED BIN(31)
as parameter number parameter-number.

The indicated conversion had a DFP source, target, or both but failed at
compile time with an operation exception. These conversions require that
the machine on which the compilation occurs have DFP hardware installed.

IBM2201I S The indicated element of the structure supplying the event
handlers for the SAX parser must have a BYADDR NATIVE FIXED BIN(31) in the
specified parameter position. See the Programming Guide for more details.

First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have type REAL
DECIMAL FIXED, or REAL DECIMAL FLOAT, and in the latter case, the DFP
option must be in effect.

IBM2196I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to
the BUILTIN name built-in function must have a BYVALUE ALIGNED BIT(8)
as parameter number parameter-number .

This applies to the ROUNDDEC and similar built-in functions.

IBM2202I S Use of the BUILTIN name built-in function requires ARCH(
level ) or greater.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers
for the SAX parser must have a BYVALUE ALIGNED BIT(8) in the specified
parameter position. See the Programming Guide for more details.

This applies to various built-in functions on some platforms. For example,
on z/OS, MEMCU4* and MEMCU*4 require at least ARCH(7).

IBM2197I S Argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have type
CHAR or WIDECHAR.

IBM2203I S The VALUE attribute may be used on a structure member only
if it is used on all base members of that structure.

This applies to the ULENGTH built-in function, for example.

IBM2198I S First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
type CHAR or WIDECHAR.

If any leaf structure member has the VALUE attribute, then all must have
the VALUE attribute.

IBM2204I S The VALUE attribute may be used on a structure member only
if no storage attribute is specified for the structure.

This applies to the UPOS and UWIDTH built-in functions, for example.

IBM2199I S The run-time option XPLINK(ON) must be in effect if object
code is to be generated.

It is invalid to specify the VALUE attribute for a member of a structure
if the structure has a storage attribute such as BASED, CONTROLLED, etc.

IBM2205I S The VALUE attribute may be used on a structure member only
if no dimension attributes are specified for its parents.

It is invalid to specify the VALUE attribute for a member of a structure
that has inherited dimensions.

IBM2206I S The VALUE attribute conflicts with the DIMENSION attribute.

It is invalid to specify the VALUE attribute for an array.

IBM2207I S The VALUE attribute may be used on a structure member only
if no parent has the UNION attribute.

It is invalid to specify the VALUE attribute for a member of a union.

The VALUE type function can be applied only to those structure types
that have at least one member with an INITIAL attribute.

IBM2211I S Shift-out code has no closing shift- in code before the
right margin.

Every DBCS shift-out code between the margins must have a matching DBCS
shift-in code also between the margins.

IBM2212I S Argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function must be
a structure.

The argument to the named built-in subroutine must be a structure.

IBM2213I S Block contains too many label arrays.

IBM2208I S Structure references that contain the VALUE attribute are
invalid.

Only the leaf elements of a structure containing elements with the
VALUE attribute may be referenced, and only the individual elements of
an array of VALUEs may be referenced.

IBM2209I S Use of nonconstant extents in BASED variables without REFER
is invalid except on scalars.

Extents in BASED variables must all be constant except where the REFER
option is used - unless the variable is a scalar. So, the first declare
below is valid, while the second is invalid.

Procedures and begin blocks must contain fewer than 2048 label arrays.

IBM2214I S Attribute is invalid on structure parents.

The XMLATTR and XMLOMIT attributes may be used only on base structure
elements.

IBM2215I S Attribute is invalid on unnamed structure elements.

The XMLATTR and XMLOMIT attributes may be used only on named structure
elements.

IBM2216I S Attribute is invalid on arrays.

    dcl x based char(n); dcl y(n,m) based fixed bin(31);

IBM2210I S The VALUE type function cannot be applied to type name since
that structure has no members with an INITIAL attribute.

The XMLATTR and XMLOMIT attributes may be used only on scalar structure
elements.

IBM2217I S XMLATTR is invalid if the previous element at that logical
level does not also have the XMLATTR attribute.

The XMLATTR attribute may be used on a structure element only if all
its previous sister elements at the same logical level also had the
XMLATTR attribute.

IBM2218I S Attribute is invalid on non-native FLOAT elements.

The XMLOMIT attribute may not be used on FLOAT elements using a data
representation not supported by the hardware.

IBM2219I S Parameters declared as INONLY must not contain any elements
declared with the ASSIGNABLE attribute.

If a parameter is declared as INONLY, then the ASSIGNABLE attribute is
invalid on it and all of the elements it contains.

IBM2220I S Parameters declared as OUTONLY must contain at least one
element declared with the ASSIGNABLE attribute.

If a parameter is declared as OUTONLY, then the NONASSIGNABLE attribute
must not be specified on all of its elements.

IBM2221I S A non-constant array extent in a BASED variable is invalid
if the array has more than one dimension.

The use of a non-constant extent in BASED variable without using REFER
is limited. In an array, its use requires that the array has only one
dimension.

IBM2222I S A non-constant array extent in a BASED variable is invalid
if the array has a non-constant lower bound.

other fields in the structure have non-constant extents.

The use of non-constant extents in BASED variables without using REFER
is limited. In an array that is part of a structure, its use requires
that no other field in the structure have non-constant extents.

IBM2224I S A non-constant AREA, BIT, GRAPHIC, or WIDECHAR extent in a
BASED variable is invalid if the variable is an array element or part
of a structure.

The use of non-constant extents in BASED variables without using REFER
is limited. In an AREA, BIT, GRAPHIC or WIDECHAR extent, its use requires
that the AREA or string is a scalar.

IBM2225I S A non-constant CHARACTER extent in a BASED variable is invalid
if the string is ALIGNED and either VARYING or VARYING4.

The use of non-constant extents in BASED variables without using REFER
is limited. In a CHARACTER extent, its use requires that the string be
either UNALIGNED, NONVARYING or VARYINGZ.

IBM2226I S A non-constant array extent in a BASED variable is invalid
if there are any sibling fields after the array or any of the array's
parents.

The use of non-constant extents in BASED variables without using REFER
is limited. In an array, its use requires that the array and the array's
parents have no sibling fields.

IBM2227I S A non-constant CHARACTER extent in a BASED structure is
invalid if the string is a member of an array of structures.

The use of non-constant extents in BASED variables without using REFER
is limited. In an array, its use requires that the array has a constant
lower bound.

IBM2223I S A non-constant array extent in a BASED structure is invalid
if any

The use of non-constant extents in BASED variables without using REFER
is limited. In a CHARACTER extent, its use requires that the string not
be part of an array.

IBM2228I S A non-constant CHARACTER extent in a BASED structure is
invalid unless the string is the last field in the structure and not
part of a union.

    dcl 1 a(100), 2 a1 fixed bin, 2 a2 fixed
bin;
    dcl 1 b(100) dimacross, 2 b1 fixed bin, 2
b2 fixed bin;

    a = b, by dimacross(1);

The use of non-constant extents in BASED variables without using REFER
is limited. In a CHARACTER extent, its use requires that the string be
the last element in the structure and not part of a union.

IBM2230I S The argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function must have
the attributes REAL FIXED BIN and scale factor zero.

IBM2234I S No arrays are permitted in the source in a BY DIMACROSS
assignment.

The source in a BY DIMACROSS assignment must not include any array
references.

IBM2235I S In a BY DIMACROSS assignment, the immediate children of any
structure not declared with DIMACROSS must not be arrays.

This applies, for example, to the POPCNT built-in function.

IBM2231I S The BUILTIN name built-in function is supported only with
the native character set.

The XMLCHAR built-in function cannot be used with DFT(EBCDIC) on Windows
or AIX nor with DFT(ASCII) on the host.

IBM2232I S There must be only one target in a BY DIMACROSS assignment.

Multiple targets are not permitted in BY DIMACROSS assignments. For
example, the following is invalid.

    dcl 1 a, 2 a1 fixed bin, 2 a2 fixed bin; dcl 1 b like a; dcl 1 c(100)
    dimacross like a;

The immediate children of a structure used in a BY DIMACROSS assignment
must be scalars or substructures, but not arrays unless the structure
was declared with the DIMACROSS attribute. For example, the following
is invalid.

    dcl 1 a, 2 a1(100) fixed bin, 2 a2(100)
fixed bin;
    dcl 1 b(100) dimacross, 2 b1 fixed bin, 2
b2 fixed bin;

    a = b, by dimacross(1);

IBM2236I S BUILTIN name argument must have the DIMACROSS attribute.

The named built-in function is valid only when applied to a reference
to a variable declared with the DIMACROSS attribute.

    a,b = c, by dimacross(jx);

IBM2237I S IBM2233I S

The target in a BY DIMACROSS assignment must be a structure reference.

The third argument to the ALLCOMPARE built-in function must be a CHAR(2)
constant.

The third argument to the ALLCOMPARE built-in function must be a
restricted expression with the attributes CHAR(2) NONVARYING.

The target in a BY DIMACROSS assignment must not be an array of structures
or a scalar. For example, the following is invalid.

IBM2238I S The third argument to the ALLCOMPARE built-in function must
specify the name of a comparison operator.

When uppercased, the third argument to the ALLCOMPARE built-in function
must be one of 'EQ', 'LT', 'LE', 'GE', 'GT', or 'NE'.

IBM2239I S Invalid use of unspecified STRUCT type type name.

If a DEFINE STRUCT statement specifies no member names, then any attempt
to dereference the type is invalid.

IBM2240I S Arithmetic operations are not allowed on handles for
unspecified structure definitions.

The size of an unspecified structure is unknown, and hence all arithmetic
operations on handles for it are ill-defined.

IBM2241I S The argument to the type function type function must be a
specified structure type name.

The argument to the named type function must be the name of a structure
type that was fully specified.

IBM2242I S Subtraction of HANDLE from HANDLE is invalid unless both
point to the same type.

If h1 is a handle for structure type t1 and h2 is a handle for structure
type t2, the h1-h2 is invalid unless t1 and t2 are the same.

IBM2243I S The attributes derived from the PROCEDURE statement for
the ENTRY constant variable name do not match those in its explicit
declaration. RETURNS attributes do not match.

A label on a PROCEDURE statement constitutes a declaration for an ENTRY
constant with that name.  That name also appears in a DECLARE statement,
but the attributes in those two declarations do not match.

IBM2244I S The attributes derived from the PROCEDURE statement for the
ENTRY constant variable name do

not match those in its explicit declaration. BYVALUE/BYADDR attributes
in RETURNS do not match.

A label on a PROCEDURE statement constitutes a declaration for an ENTRY
constant with that name.  That name also appears in a DECLARE statement,
but the attributes in those two declarations do not match.

IBM2245I S The attributes derived from the PROCEDURE statement for
the ENTRY constant variable name do not match those in its explicit
declaration. LINKAGE values do not match.

A label on a PROCEDURE statement constitutes a declaration for an ENTRY
constant with that name.  That name also appears in a DECLARE statement,
but the attributes in those two declarations do not match.

IBM2246I S The attributes derived from the PROCEDURE statement for
the ENTRY constant variable name do not match those in its explicit
declaration. OPTIONS values do not match.

A label on a PROCEDURE statement constitutes a declaration for an ENTRY
constant with that name.  That name also appears in a DECLARE statement,
but the attributes in those two declarations do not match.

IBM2247I S The attributes derived from the PROCEDURE statement for
the ENTRY constant variable name do not match those in its explicit
declaration. Parameter counts do not match.

A label on a PROCEDURE statement constitutes a declaration for an ENTRY
constant with that name.  That name also appears in a DECLARE statement,
but the attributes in those two declarations do not match.

IBM2248I S The attributes derived from the PROCEDURE statement for
the ENTRY constant variable name do not match those in its explicit
declaration. BYVALUE/BYADDR

attributes in parameter parameter- number do not match.

explicit declaration. Alignment of parameter parameter-number does
not match.

A label on a PROCEDURE statement constitutes a declaration for an ENTRY
constant with that name.  That name also appears in a DECLARE statement,
but the attributes in those two declarations do not match.

IBM2249I S The attributes derived from the PROCEDURE statement for
the ENTRY constant variable name do not match those in its explicit
declaration. Number of dimensions for parameter parameter-number do
not match.

A label on a PROCEDURE statement constitutes a declaration for an ENTRY
constant with that name.  That name also appears in a DECLARE statement,
but the attributes in those two declarations do not match.

IBM2250I S The attributes derived from the PROCEDURE statement for
the ENTRY constant variable name do not match those in its explicit
declaration. Lower bounds for parameter parameter-number do not match.

A label on a PROCEDURE statement constitutes a declaration for an ENTRY
constant with that name.  That name also appears in a DECLARE statement,
but the attributes in those two declarations do not match.

IBM2251I S The attributes derived from the PROCEDURE statement for
the ENTRY constant variable name do not match those in its explicit
declaration. Upper bounds for parameter parameter-number do not match.

A label on a PROCEDURE statement constitutes a declaration for an ENTRY
constant with that name.  That name also appears in a DECLARE statement,
but the attributes in those two declarations do not match.

IBM2252I S The attributes derived from the PROCEDURE statement for the
ENTRY constant variable name do not match those in its

A label on a PROCEDURE statement constitutes a declaration for an ENTRY
constant with that name.  That name also appears in a DECLARE statement,
but the attributes in those two declarations do not match.

IBM2253I S The attributes derived from the PROCEDURE statement for
the ENTRY constant variable name do not match those in its explicit
declaration. Number and attributes of structure members in parameter
parameter-number do not match.

A label on a PROCEDURE statement constitutes a declaration for an ENTRY
constant with that name.  That name also appears in a DECLARE statement,
but the attributes in those two declarations do not match.

IBM2254I S The attributes derived from the PROCEDURE statement for
the ENTRY constant variable name do not match those in its explicit
declaration. Attributes of parameter parameter-number do not match.

A label on a PROCEDURE statement constitutes a declaration for an ENTRY
constant with that name.  That name also appears in a DECLARE statement,
but the attributes in those two declarations do not match.

IBM2255I S The argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function must be
numeric, BIT, or CHARACTER.

This message applies to the UTF8 built-in function.  GRAPHIC and
non-computational arguments are not allowed.

IBM2256I S The result of the BUILTIN name built-in function would have
a length greater than the the maximum allowed for a CHARACTER string.

Conversion of CHAR or WCHAR to UTF-8 can produce a result string that is
longer than the source string because some CHAR(1) and WCHAR(1) values can
produce CHAR(2) or CHAR(3) strings when converted to UTF-8. If there are
too many of these values in the source string then the target string would
have a length greater than the the maximum allowed for a CHARACTER string.

IBM2257I S The argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function must hold
valid UTF-16.

This message applies to the UTF8 built-in function.

IBM2258I S The argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function must have
type CHARACTER.

This message applies to the UTF8TOCHAR and UTF8TOWCHAR built-in functions.

IBM2259I S The argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function must
contain valid UTF-8.

This message applies to the UTF8TOCHAR and UTF8TOWCHAR built-in functions.

These characters are allowed in PICTURE specifications, but not in
WIDEPIC.

IBM2263I S REFER objects must not be COMPLEX WIDEPIC.

REFER objects should have the REAL attribute.

IBM2264I S The attribute attribute is invalid in a LOCATES descriptor.

The LOCATES descriptor may not specify a structure, union or array. The
following code example is invalid:

   dcl b offset(a) locates( 1 union, 2 ptr, 2
ptr );

IBM2265I S Extents in LOCATES descriptors must be constants.

In LOCATES descriptors, any string length and AREA size must be specified
with a restricted expression that has computational type.

IBM2266I S The argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have the
LOCATES attribute.

IBM2260I S INITIAL expressions in DEFINE STRUCT must not depend on any
address values.

These expressions must be simple restricted expressions. For example,
ENTRY, FILE and LABEL constants must not be used in these INITIAL
expressions

IBM2261I S Overpunch and currency characters are not allowed in WIDEPIC
specifications.

These characters are allowed in PICTURE specifications, but not in
WIDEPIC.

IBM2262I S A and X characters are not allowed in WIDEPIC specifications.

This rule applies to the LOCVAL and similar built-in functions.

IBM2267I S The first argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must
have the LOCATES attribute.

This rule applies to the LOCNEWSPACE and similar built-in functions.

IBM2268I S Argument to the LOCVAL pseudovariable must have the LOCATES
attribute.

The LOCVAL pseudovariable can be applied only to variables with the
LOCATES attribute.

IBM2269I S LOCATES attribute is valid only with OFFSET.

The LOCATES attribute cannot be used on any other types.

IBM2270I S Only one description is allowed in a LOCATES descriptor.

A located type can specify only one value. The following declaration is
not correct:

    dcl b offset(a) locates( ptr, ptr );

IBM2271I S The first argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must be
a scalar reference.

This rule applies to the LOCNEWVALUE built-in functions.

IBM2276I S The argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have the
LOCATES attribute or contain subelements with the LOCATES attribute.

This rule applies to the LOCSTG and similar built-in functions.

IBM2277I S INCLUDE statements are not allowed under NOINCLUDE.

Under the NOINCLUDE compiler option, %INCLUDE statements are valid only
if the MACRO preprocessor is used.

IBM2278I S Source is not valid UTF-8.

This rule applies to the LOCNEWSPACE and similar built-in functions.

IBM2272I S The second argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must
be a scalar reference.

This rule applies to the LOCNEWVALUE and similar built-in functions.

IBM2273I S The OFFSET argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must
have an AREA qualification.

This rule applies to the LOCVAL and similar built-in functions.

IBM2274I S The second argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must
have the LOCATES attribute.

This rule applies to the LOCNEWVALUE and similar built-in functions.

IBM2275I S Third argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must have
type AREA.

The source file contains lines that would be rejected by the UVALID
built-in function.

IBM2279I S option option contains invalid UTF-8.

The specified option contains values that would be rejected by the UVALID
built-in function.

IBM2280I S The corresponding characters in the two NAMES strings must
have the same length.

In the NAMES( 'abc', 'xyz' ) option, each of the UTF-8 characters in
the first string must have a corresponding character of the same UTF-8
length in the second string.

IBM2281I S The first argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must
have computational type or ordinal type.

An expression contains the named built-in function with the specified
argument having a noncomputational type that is either not an ordinal

type. This message applies to the INLIST and BETWEEN built-in functions.

numeric or any FIXED numeric with a scale factor that is either negative
or larger than its preicison.

IBM2282I S REINIT reference must be a level 1 item.

IBM2288I S In the statement REINIT x, x must not be a structure or
union member.

Argument number argument number to the BUILTIN name built- in function
must not be a UNION or contain any UNIONs.

IBM2283I S REINIT references must be BASED, AUTO, CTL or STATIC.

In the statement REINIT x, x must not be DEFINED, constant, or a
parameter.

IBM2284I S The first and second arguments to the BUILTIN name built-in
function must have matching types.

This message applies to the LOCNEWVALUE built- in functions. In
LOCNEWVALUE( x, y ), if y has the attribute LOCATES( t ) where t is an
ORDINAL or STRUCT type, then x must have the same type.

The JsonGetValue and similar built-in functions cannot be applied to
unions or to structures containing unions.

IBM2289I S Argument number argument number to the BUILTIN name built-
in function must not contain any element with type attribute.

The JsonGetValue and similar built-in functions cannot be applied to
aggregates or scalars containing GRAPHIC data.

IBM2290I S Member member-number in the event structure argument to the
BUILTIN name built-in function must have a BYADDR NATIVE FIXED BIN(63)
as parameter number parameter-number.

IBM2285I S The argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function must have
the attributes UNSIGNED REAL FIXED BIN(64,0).

This applies, for example, to the PLISTCK and PLISTCKF built-in
subroutines.

IBM2286I S The argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function must have
the attributes CHAR NONVARYING and length length.

This applies, for example, to the PLISTCKE built-in subroutine where
the argument must have length 16.

IBM2287I S Argument number argument number to the BUILTIN name built-
in function must contain only standard computational types.

The indicated element of the structure supplying the event handlers for
the SAX parser must have a BYADDR NATIVE FIXED BIN(63) in the specified
parameter position. See the Programming Guide for more details.

IBM2291I S attribute precision is invalid.

In 64-bit mode, the only valid values for the POINTER precision are 32
and 64. Otherwise the only valid value is 32.

IBM2292I S Target in statement statement must not be the name of a PROC
or ENTRY statement.

The target in a FETCH or RELEASE statement must be outside the current
compilation unit.

The JsonGetValue and similar built-in functions cannot be applied to
aggregates or scalars containing noncomputational types or containing
any COMPLEX

IBM2293I S The BUILTIN name built-in function is not supported under
CMPAT(V1).

CMPAT(V2), CMPAT(V3) or CMPAT(LE) must be used when compiling any code
using this built-in function.

IBM2294I S A value greater than 64K for the STRING suboption of the
LIMITS option is valid only under CMPAT(V3) and CMPAT(LE).

Strings longer than 65535 are not supported under CMPAT(V1) or CMPAT(V2).

IBM2295I S A value greater than 32K for the STRING suboption of the
LIMITS option is valid only under BIFPREC(31).

Strings longer than 32767 are not supported under BIFPREC(15).

IBM2296I S Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built- in
function must have the same ordinal type as the first argument.

An expression contains the named built-in function with the specified
argument having either a non- ordinal type or an ordinal type that is
not the same ordinal type as the first argument. This message applies
to the INLIST and BETWEEN built-in functions.

IBM2297I S The BUILTIN name built-in function is supported only under
LP(64).

Built-in functions such as ALLOC31 are supported only under z/OS and
only under the LP(64) option.

IBM2298I S The BUILTIN name built-in function is supported only when
the compiler option CHECK(STORAGE) is used.

Built-in functions such as ALLOCSIZE are supported only under the
CHECK(STORAGE) compiler option.

IBM2299I S No value can fall in the interval defined by the second and
third arguments to the BUILTIN name built-in function.

The values a and b in BETWEEN(x,a,b) must satisfy a <= b. The values
a and b in BETWEENEXCLUSIVE(x,a,b) must satisfy a < b, and the same is
true for BETWEENLEFTEXCLUSIVE and BETWEENRIGHTEXCLUSIVE.

IBM2300I S The compiler was disabled in the IFAPRDxx parmlib member. The
compilation will terminate without further processing.

The SMF registration of the compiler failed because it has been disabled
in the IFAPRDxx parmlib member.

IBM2301I S The IFAEDREG registration of the compiler failed with return
code return code . The compilation will terminate without further
processing.

The SMF registration of the compiler failed with the indicated return
code.

IBM2302I S The option option is not supported under LP(64).

The specified option is not supported under LP(64).  This is true,
for example, of the SYSTEM(IMS) option.

IBM2303I S codepage is not a supported codepage.

The specified value is not a supported codepage. See the Programming
Guide for a list of the supported codepages.

IBM2304I S The attribute attribute is not supported under CMPAT(V1).

CMPAT(V2), CMPAT(V3) or CMPAT(LE) must be used when compiling any code
using this attribute.

IBM2305I S The ASSERT COMPARE operator must be a CHAR(2) constant.

If an operator is specified in an ASSERT COMPARE statement, it must be
a restricted expression with the attributes CHAR(2) NONVARYING.

IBM2306I S The ASSERT COMPARE operator must specify the name of a
comparison operator.

This message applies to the third argument to the BINSEARCHX built-in
function and similar functions.  This argument is the compare function
to be invoked to compare elements during the binary search. It must be
a LIMITED ENTRY (and hence must not be a nested PROCEDURE) and must have
the other properties listed in the message.

IBM2311I S Labels are not allowed on the END statement for a PACKAGE.

If an operator is specified in an ASSERT COMPARE statement, it must be
one of 'EQ', 'LT', 'LE', 'GE', 'GT', or 'NE'.

IBM2307I S The first argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function must
be a suitable one-dimensional array.

The array argument to the named built-in function must have exactly
one dimension. For BINSEARCH and QUICKSORT, the array must consist of
scalars. This message applies to the BINSEARCH, BINSEARCHX, QUICKSORT,
and QUICKSORTX built-in functions.

IBM2308I S The first argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function must
be ALIGNED if NONVARYING BIT.

If the first argument to the named built-in function is NONVARYING
BIT, then it must be ALIGNED. This message applies to the BINSEARCH,
BINSEARCHX, QUICKSORT, and QUICKSORTX built-in functions.

IBM2309I S Comparison in BUILTIN name built-in function is unsupported.

This message applies to the BINSEARCH built-in function and similar
functions. The array and the search argument must be both string or
REAL numeric, both ordinals of the same ordinal type, both pointers,
or both handles to the same structure type.

IBM2310I S The compare function passed to the BUILTIN name built-in
function must be a LIMITED ENTRY, must return BYVALUE a NATIVE FIXED
BIN(31), must have exactly two BYVALUE POINTER arguments, and must have
the OPTLINK linkage.

Labels must not be applied to the END statement for a PACKAGE.

IBM2312I S Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built- in
function must be a scalar expression.

An expression contains the named built-in function when the specified
argument is an aggregate expression.

IBM2313I S Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built- in
function must be an array expression.

An expression contains the named built-in function when the specified
argument is a scalar or structure expression.

IBM2314I S BUILTIN name built-in function does not support arrays of
this type.

The QUICKSORT built-in supports only a limited set of array types. For
example, FIXED BIN and ORDINAL arrays must be REAL and NATIVE.

IBM2315I S Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built-in
function must have type size_t.

This message applies to the REGEX and other built- in functions when some
arguments must have the attributes NATIVE REAL FIXED BIN PRECISION(p,0)

where p = 31 in 32-bit addressing mode and p = 63 in 64-bit addressing
mode.

IBM2316I S Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built-in
function must have CHARACTER type.

The items in VALUELIST and VALUERANGE lists should be unique.

IBM2322I S The second value in the VALUERANGE attribute must be larger
than the first.

This message applies to the REGEX and other built- in functions where
some arguments must have the CHARACTER attribute.

IBM2317I S Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built-in
function must be an ASSIGNABLE reference.

The indicated argument to the named built-in function must be an
ASSIGNABLE reference so that it can be assigned a value. This message
applies, for example, to the first two arguments of the REGEX built-in
function.

IBM2318I S attribute attribute is valid only with computational types.

The VALUELIST and VALUERANGE attributes cannot be used on
non-computational tyeps.

IBM2319I S attribute attribute is not valid with COMPLEX types.

The VALUERANGE attribute cannot be used on COMPLEX numeric types.

IBM2320I S First argument to BUILTIN name built-in function must be a
reference to a variable with the VALIDLIST or VALIDRANGE attribute.

The argument to the VALIDVALUE built-in function must have one of the
above attributes so that its value can be checked against the declared
list or range of values.

IBM2321I S attribute contains duplicate values.

The items in the VALUERANGE attribute should be in strictly ascending
order. Both of the following are invalid.

    dcl a fixed bin valuerange(12,1); dcl b fixed bin valuerange(1,1);

IBM2323I S Arguments number and number to the BUILTIN name built-in
function must have comparable types.

The arguments to the VALIDVALUE built-in function must be
comparable. Similarly, the second and third arguments to the IFTHENELSE
built-in function must be comparable. This means that if the first
argument has a computational type, then the second must also, and if
the first argument has an ordinal type, then the second must have the
same ordinal type, etc

IBM2324I S The attributes derived from the PROCEDURE statement for
the ENTRY constant variable name do not match those in its explicit
declaration. The EXTERNAL names do not match: one name is external name,
and the other is external name.

A label on a PROCEDURE statement constitutes a declaration for an ENTRY
constant with that name.  That name also appears in a DECLARE statement,
but the attributes in those two declarations do not match.

IBM2325I S The values specified for the ROUTCDE and DESC in a WTO must
be between 1 and 16.

These values specify which bits are set in the ROUTCDE and DESC fields
when a WTO or WTOR is issued. These fields consist of 16 bits, and hence
the values must be between 1 and 16.

IBM2326I S The argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function must have
UCHAR type.

DEFINED is not supported with UCHAR.

This message applies to the LowerLatin1, UpperLatin1 and related built-in
functions.

IBM2333I S Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built- in
function must have a computational, ordinal or pointer type.

IBM2327I S TRANSLATE of a UCHAR string requires 3 arguments.

TRANSLATE of a CHARACTER string will accept 2 arguments in which case
COLLATE() will be assumed for the third argument. But there is no
equivalent support for TRANSLATE of a UCHAR string.

IBM2328I S UX literal specifies an invalid UTF-8 string.

Not all hex strings represent valid UTF-8 strings. For more details
on valid UTF-8 strings, see the LRM and the text describing the UVALID
built-in function.

IBM2329I S Argument to BUILTIN name built- in function must have type
CHAR, UCHAR or WCHAR.

An expression contains the named built-in function with the specified
argument having a noncomputational type that is neither an ordinal
type nor a POINTER or HANDLE. This message applies to the IFTHENELSE
built-in function.

IBM2334I S Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built-in
function must be nonvarying with a known length.

An expression contains the named built-in function with the specified
argument be a string that is either VARYING or has an unknown length. This
message applies to the IFTHENELSE built-in function.

IBM2335I S VALUELISTFROM reference must name a structure consisting only
of elements with the VALUE attribute.

This applies to the UVALID built-in function, for example.

IBM2330I S The BUILTIN name built-in function does not support UCHAR
arguments.

In VALUELISTFROM X, X must not contain any substructures and every
element of X must have the VALUE attribute.

This applies to the CENTER, LEFT, and RIGHT built-in functions, for
example.

IBM2331I S The input structure to the BUILTIN name built-in function
must not contain any UTF-8 elements.

The XMLCHAR built-in function cannot be applied to structures containing
any UCHAR data.

IBM2332I S The base reference in the DEFINED attribute cannot have a
UTF-8 type.

IBM2336I S The fourth argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function
must be a constant specifying the name of a casing rule.

When uppercased, the argument to the named built-in function must be
one of 'ASIS', 'LOWER', or 'UPPER'.

IBM2337I S BUILTIN name argument must have numeric type.

An expression contains the named built-in function with an argument that
is not FIXED, FLOAT, or numeric PICTURE.

IBM2338I S A QUALIFY block may contain only DEFINE statements, DECLARE
statements, and nested QUALIFY blocks.

IBM2345I S type name is a type name, but not the name of an ORDINAL type.

In a declare statement that specifies ORDINAL x, x must be the name of
an ORDINAL type.

DEFAULT statements, for example, are not allowed in QUALIFY blocks.

IBM2346I S IBM2339I S

A QUALIFY block must have a name, but only one.

Specify only one label on a QUALIFY statement.

IBM2340I S A name declared in a QUALIFY block must be a scalar.

A DECLARE statement in a QUALIFY block cannot specify a structure,
union or array.

IBM2341I S A name declared in a QUALIFY block must have the VALUE
attribute.

Argument number argument number to BUILTIN name built-in function built-in
function must be either a scalar or a one- dimensional array of scalars.

This applies, for example, to the REGEX built-in function.

IBM2347I S The second argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function
must have the same number of dimensions as the first argument.

This applies, for example, to the REGEX built-in function. In REGEX(
x, y, ... ), either x and y must both be scalars or they must both be
one-dimensional.

A DECLARE statement in a QUALIFY block cannot specify a variable or a
constant unless it has the VALUE attribute.

IBM2348I S IBM2342I S

CONVERSION condition raised by attempt to convert the GRAPHIC character
with hex value source- value to CHARACTER.

The second argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function must have the
same lower bound as the first argument. But its lower bound is lbound
while the first argument's lower bound is lbound.

This applies, for example, to the REGEX built-in function.

The source value cannot be converted to SBCS.

IBM2349I S IBM2343I S

The type name type name is ambiguous.

Enough qualification must be provided to make any type reference unique.

IBM2344I S type name is a type name, but not the name of a STRUCTURE type.

In a declare statement that specifies HANDLE x, x must be the name of
a STRUCTURE type.

The second argument to the BUILTIN name built-in function must have the
same upper bound as the first argument. But its upper bound is hbound
while the first argument's upper bound is hbound.

This applies, for example, to the REGEX built-in function.

IBM2350I S attribute must be returned BYADDR.

BYADDR must be used in RETURNS of PICTURE and VARYING.

IBM2351I S Scale factor in BUILTIN name is less than 0.

The scale factor of the result of a division is the difference of
the two scale factors plus the difference between the maximum allowed
precision and the precision of the dividend. This value must be between
-128 and 127.

IBM2355I S The scale factors in the named built-in functions must be
nonnegative. The compiler flags the second statement below, but not the
third one (which is a possible replacement for the second).

Add and subtract of FIXED(precision,scale-factor) and
FIXED(precision,scale-factor) is not allowed because the difference in
scale factors is greater than the maximum precision allowed.

     b = round( c, -1 );

     b = 10 * round( c/ 10, 0 );

IBM2352I S The difference between the rounding digit scale-factor
specified in the BUILTIN name built-in function and the number of
fractional digits in its attributes argument is too large: it is greater
than the maximum FIXED base precision.

In ROUND(x,n), if x is FIXED DEC(p,q), then n-q must be zero or less
and must never exceed 31.

     dcl b fixed dec(31,10);

     display( round(b,42) );

IBM2353I S Multiplication of FIXED(precision,scale-factor) and
FIXED(precision,scale-factor) would produce a result with a scale factor
that is not between -128 and 127.

The scale factor of the result of a multiply is the sum of the two scale
factors. This value must be between -128 and 127.

For an add or subtract of BIN(p1,q1) and BIN(p2,q2), the value abs(q1-q2)
must be less than or equal to 63.  For an add or subtract of DEC(p1,q1)
and DEC(p2,q2), the value abs(q1-q2) must be less than or equal to 31.

IBM2356I S In commalist number commalist_count, the number of expressions
is element_count, but the number of expressions in the first commalist is
element_count .  The number of expressions in each commalist must match.

The number of expressions in each commalist in the INITACROSS attribute
must match. If they did not, some of the members of the INITACROSS
structure would have too few or too many INITIAL values. For example,
in this (invalid) declare, the third commalist has one less element than
the previous 2 commalists (because the capital for Spain is missing).

         dcl
           1 data(3)    static

initacross(  ('DE','Germany', 'Berlin' )
                                ,
('FR','France', 'Paris' )
                                ,('SP','Spain')
                              )
             ,2 cc      char(2) ,2 name    char(40) var ,2 capital
             char(40) var
      ;

IBM2354I S Divison of FIXED(precision,scale- factor) and
FIXED(precision,scale- factor) would produce a result with a scale factor
that is not between -128 and 127.

IBM2357I S INITACROSS structure member count of member_count does not
match the implied member count of element_count from the INITACROSS
attribute.

The explicit member count for an INITACROSSS structure must match the
implicit member count defined by the number of elements in each of
the INITACROSS commalists. For example, in this (invalid) declare, the
explicit member count for the structure is 2, but the implicit member
count is 3.

         dcl
           1 data(3)    static

initacross(  ('DE','Germany', 'Berlin' )
                                ,
('FR','France', 'Paris' )
                                ,('SP','Spain',
'Madrid')
                              )
             ,2 cc      char(2) ,2 name    char(40) var
      ;

OPTIONS( AMODE31 ) and OPTIONS( AMODE64 ) require FETCHABLE, NODESCRIPTOR,
and LINKAGE options to be specified.

IBM2365I S ENTRY declared with OPTIONS( amode option ) must specify either
RETURNS BYVALUE of a small integer type, or RETURNS BYADDR, or no RETURNS.

An ENTRY with OPTIONS( AMODE31 ) or OPTIONS( AMODE64 ) cannot return
other types. Only ORDINAL and unscaled REAL FIXED BIN of 4 bytes or less
are allowed in RETURNS BYVALUE for AMODE31 and AMODE64.

IBM2358I S INITACROSS structures must be one-dimensional arrays.

IBM2366I S The INITACROSS attribute must be applied only to
one-dimensional arrays with no inherited deimensions.

IBM2359I S INITACROSS structure members must all be scalars.

The members of a structure with the INITACROSS attribute must not be
structures or unions and must not have any dimensions other than what
they inherited from the structure itself.

IBM2362I S The rounding digit scale-factor specified in the BUILTIN name
built-in function is too negative: its absolute value is greater than
than the number of non-fractional digits in its attributes argument.

In ROUND(x,n), if x is FIXED(p,q), then n+(p-q) must be greater than
or equal to 0. Otherwise, the computation is somewhat meaningless. For
example, if x is FIXED BIN(5,4), then ROUND(x,-2) would request a rounding
of a non-existent tens power.

IBM2364I S ENTRY declared with OPTIONS( amode option ) must also specify
OPTIONS( option name ).

With the exception of addresses and integers, all arguments passed to
an ENTRY declared with OPTIONS( amode option ) must be passed BYADDR.

OPTIONS( AMODE31 ) and OPTIONS( AMODE64 ) do not support passing
arguments BYVALUE unless they have one of the types POINTER, HANDLE,
ORDINAL, or REAL FIXED BIN.

An ENTRY declared with OPTIONS( AMODE31 ) or OPTIONS( AMODE64 ) cannot
be implicitly or explicitly assigned to another ENTRY.

An ENTRY with OPTIONS( AMODE31 ) or OPTIONS( AMODE64 ) cannot be used
as the source in an assignment, as an argument, or as a RETURN value.

IBM2368I S ENTRY declared with OPTIONS( amode option ) must specify a
(possibly empty) parenthesized list of no more than 64 parameters.

An ENTRY with OPTIONS( AMODE31 ) or OPTIONS( AMODE64 ) cannot be declared
as just ENTRY. Its declare must indicate the number of arguments that
it expects, and that number must be less than or equal to 64. If it has
no arguments, it should be declared as ENTRY().

IBM2367I S

IBM2369I S All aggregate arguments passed to an ENTRY declared with
OPTIONS( AMODE31 ) must be connected variable references.

An argument passed to an ENTRY with OPTIONS( AMODE31 ) must not be a
structure or array expression, and if it is an array reference, it must
be connected.

IBM2370I S The attributes specified in the keyword of name do not match
those in its original definition.

The attributes in XDECLARE must exactly match those in its original
DECLARE.

IBM2371I S Source has length source-length which is less than the length

of the source pattern source- pattern. Since the pattern has no zero
suppression, invoking this REPATTERN will cause the ERROR condition to
be raised.

In REPATTERN( d, p, q ), if LENGTH( d ) is smaller than LENGTH( q ),
the code is valid only if q has some zero suppression (Z) characters.

IBM2372I S XDECLARE statement must specify a name.

Statements that start with XDECLARE * and XDECLARE 1 * are invalid.

Chapter 5. MACRO, CICS, and SQL Preprocessor Messages (3000-3999)

IBM3000I I note

This message is used to report DB2 or CICS backend messages with a return
code of 0.

IBM3019I I Program contains no EXEC SQL statements requiring translation.

The SQL suboption has been specified for the PP option, but the program
contains no EXEC SQL statements other than possibly EXEC SQL INCLUDE
statements. The DBRMLIB will not be updated.

IBM3020I I Comment spans line-count lines.

A comment ends on a different line than it begins.  This may indicate
that an end-of-comment delimiter is missing.

IBM3021I I String spans line-count lines.

     %a: proc; %end; %dcl a;

IBM3252I W The attribute attribute conflicts with previous attributes
and is ignored.

Attributes must be consistent.

     dcl a fixed char;

IBM3253I W Comment spans more than one file.

A comment ends in a different file than it begins. This may indicate
that an end-of-comment statement is missing.

IBM3254I W String spans more than one file.

A string ends on a different line than it begins. This may indicate that
a closing quote is missing.

IBM3024I I note

This message is used by %NOTE statements with a return code of 0.

IBM3250I W note

This message is used to report DB2 or CICS backend messages with a return
code of 4.

IBM3251I W identifier is multiply defined, but with different
attributes. The declaration is ignored.

Attributes and declares must be consistent.

A string ends in a different file than it begins. This may indicate that
a closing quote is missing.

IBM3255I W Delimiter missing between nondelimiter and nondelimiter. A
blank is assumed.

A delimiter (for example, a blank or a comma) is required between all
identifiers and constants.

     dcl 1 a, 2 b, 3c;

IBM3256I W Multiple closure of groups. END statements will be inserted
to close intervening groups.

149

Using one END statement to close more than one group of statements is
permitted, but it may indicate a coding error.

(possibly empty) parenthesized list.

IBM3257I W Missing character assumed.

The indicated character is missing, and there are no more characters
in the source. The missing character has been inserted by the parser in
order to correct your source.

IBM3258I W Missing character assumed before character.

The indicated character is missing and has been inserted by the parser
in order to correct your source.

     %dcl jump fixed; %skip %jump = 2;

IBM3259I W note

This message is used by %NOTE statements with a return code of 4.

IBM3260I W Syntax of the %CONTROL statement is incorrect.

A suboption of an option has been incorrectly specified. It must be
followed by a left parenthesis and then a (possibly empty) list of items
and a closing right parenthesis.

   *process deprecate(stmt);

IBM3265I W Number of lines specified with %SKIP must be between 0 and
999 inclusive.

Skip amounts greater than 999 are not supported.

     %skip(2000);

IBM3270I W 'EXEC CICS' encountered, but the CICS option is not in effect.
Command ignored.

The CICS option must be in effect if the source contains EXEC CICS
statements.

IBM3271I W 'EXEC CSPM' encountered, but the CSPM option is not in effect.
Command ignored.

The %CONTROL statement must be followed by FORMAT or NOFORMAT option
enclosed in parentheses and then a semicolon.

IBM3261I W The suboption suboption is not valid for the suboption option
of the option option.

A suboption of a suboption of an option is incorrect.  The suboption
may be unknown or outside the allowable range.

The CSPM option must be in effect if the source contains EXEC CSPM
statements.

IBM3272I W 'EXEC DLI' encountered, but the DLI option is not in effect.
Command ignored.

The DLI option must be in effect if the source contains EXEC DLI
statements.

IBM3281I W SELECT statement contains no WHEN or OTHERWISE clauses.

   *process deprecate(stmt(test));

IBM3262I W The suboption option of the option option must be followed by a

WHEN or OTHERWISE clauses are not required on SELECT statements, but
their absence may indicate a coding error.

IBM3283I W SELECT statement contains no WHEN clauses.

IBM3291I W The OPTIONS option option-name conflicts with the LANGLVL
compiler option. The option will be applied.

SELECT statements do not require WHEN clauses, but their absence may
indicate a coding error.

IBM3285I W FIXED BINARY constant contains too many digits. Excess
nonsignificant digits will be ignored.

The named option is not part of the PL/I language definition as specified
in the LANGLVL compiler option.

IBM3292I W suboption is not a valid suboption for option.

A FIXED BINARY constant must contain 31 or fewer digits.

The specified suboption is not one of the supported suboptions of the
named option.

IBM3286I W FIXED DECIMAL constant contains too many digits. Excess
nonsignificant digits will be ignored.

The maximum precision for FIXED DECIMAL constants is specified by the
FIXEDDEC suboption of the LIMITS compiler option.

IBM3287I W Mantissa in FLOAT BINARY constant contains more digits than
the implementation maximum.  Excess nonsignificant digits will be ignored.

Float binary constants are limited to 64 digits.

IBM3288I W Mantissa in FLOAT DECIMAL constant contains more digits than
the implementation maximum.  Excess nonsignificant digits will be ignored.

Float decimal constants are limited to 18 digits.

IBM3289I W FLOAT literal is too big for its implicit precision. An
appropriate HUGE value is assumed.

The precision for a float literal is implied by the number of digits in
its mantissa. For instance 1e99 is implicitly FLOAT DECIMAL(1), but the
value 1e99 is larger than the largest value a FLOAT DECIMAL(1) can hold.

   *process pp(macro('fixed(long)'));

IBM3293I W A required suboption is missing for the suboption option.

The named option requires a suboption.

   *process pp(macro('fixed'));

IBM3294I W A closing parenthesis is missing in the specification of the
option option. One is assumed.

A closing parenthesis is missing in the specification of the named option.

   *process pp(macro('fixed(bin'));

IBM3295I W option is not a supported option.

The named option is not, in fact, an option.

   *process pp(macro('float'));

IBM3299I W Syntax of the %LINE directive is incorrect.

The %LINE directive must be followed, with optional intervening blanks,
by a parenthesis, a line number, a comma, a file name and a closing
parenthesis.

statement will cause only the immediately enclosing DO-group to be exited;
the loop will not be exited.

   %line( 19, test.pli );

IBM3300I W identifier has not been declared.  CHARACTER attribute assumed.

All variables should be declared.

   do i = 1 to n;
     if a(i) > 0 then
       do;
         call f; leave;
       end;
     else;
   end;

IBM3309I W Comparison of BUILTIN name to a value it could not return
is odd.

IBM3313I W Result of comparison is always constant.

This message points to a likely programming error.  For example, comparing
SYSPOINTERSIZE to the value 32 is almost certainly an error since the
only values SYSPOINTERSIZE could return are 4 and 8.

IBM3310I W First argument to BUILTIN name built-in should have string
type.

This message is produced when a variable is compared to a constant equal
to the largest or smallest value that the variable could assume. In the
following loop, the variable x can never be greater than 99, and hence
the implied comparison executed each time through the loop will always
result in a '1'b.

To eliminate this message, apply the CHAR or BIT built-in function to
the first argument.

   do x pic'99';

   do x = 1 to 99; end;

   dcl i fixed bin; display( substr(i,4) );

IBM3311I W Argument number to the BUILTIN name built-in function is
missing.  A null value will be passed for the missing argument.

An argument to the function reference is missing. A null string or zero
will be passed, as appropriate, for the missing argument.

    %dcl a fixed;

    %a = max(n,);

IBM3314I W The reference reference could refer to a parent or its child,
but the child is assumed.

For a structure named X with first child named X, a reference to X would
by PL/I rules be resolved to the parent. But references to structures
containing structures are invalid in SQL statements and so the reference
is assumed to refer to the child. The reference should be changed from
X to X.X.

IBM3315I W The reference reference is an array of structures. Arrays of
structures are not valid in SQL statements, but because this structure
consists of only one element, the reference is treated as if it were a
reference to its lone child.

IBM3312I W LEAVE will exit noniterative DO- group.

This message is not produced if the LEAVE statement specifies a label. In
the following loop, the LEAVE

If a dimensioned structure named A consists of just one child B, a
reference to A is treated as a reference to A.B.

IBM3316I W The reference reference is a structure containing an array.

Structures containing arrays are not valid in SQL statements, but because
this structure consists of only one element, the reference is treated
as if it were a reference to its lone child.

   %a: proc( x ) char ;
     dcl x char; return( '1729' );
   %end; %act a;

   display( a );

If a structure named A consists of just one child B and B is an array,
a reference to A is treated as a reference to A.B.

IBM3323I W Too few arguments for PROCEDURE identifier. Null values will
be passed for the missing arguments.

IBM3317I W note

This message is used to report DB2 message DSNH030I.

IBM3320I W RETURNS attribute in ENTRY declare ignored.

ENTRY declares should not specify a RETURNS attribute. In the example
below, the "returns( char )" should be omitted.

There are too few arguments for the specified procedure. Null strings
or zeros will be passed, as appropriate, for the missing arguments.

   %a: proc( x ) char ;
     dcl x char; return( '1729' );
   %end; %act a;

   display( a() );

   %dcl a entry returns( char );

IBM3324I W Too many arguments for PROCEDURE identifier. Excess ignored.

IBM3321I W RETURNS option assumed to enclose attribute in PROCEDURE
statement.

There are too many arguments for the specified procedure. The excess
arguments will be ignored.

In a PROCEDURE statement, any RETURNS attribute should be enclosed in
parentheses following the RETURNS keyword. In the example below, the
"char" attribute should be specified as "returns( char )".

   %a: proc( x ) char ;
     dcl x char; return( '1729' );
   %end; %act a;

   display( a(1,2) );

   %a: proc char ;
     return( '1729' );
   %end;

IBM3322I W Argument list for PROCEDURE identifier is missing. It will
be invoked without any arguments.

References in open code to PROCEDUREs that have parameters should always
include at least an empty argument list. For example, the "display( a )"
below should be "display( a() )".

IBM3325I W No data attributes specified in declare for identifier.

Preprocessor variables should be declared with an attribute such as CHAR
or FIXED. This message could indicate that there is an extraneous comma
in the declare statement as in this example.

   %dcl a, char;

IBM3326I W The LIKE reference is neither a structure nor a union.

The LIKE reference cannot be a scalar or an array of scalars.

    dcl
      1 a,
        2 b1 like c, 2 b2 like c,
      1 c,
        2 d fixed bin, 2 e fixed bin;
    dcl
      1 x like a.b1;

    dcl
      a fixed bin, 1 b like a;

IBM3327I W The LIKE reference is ambiguous.

The LIKE reference needs enough qualification to be unique.

    dcl
      1 x like b, 1 a,
        2 b,
          3 c, 3 d,
        2 e,
          3 f, 3 g,
      1 h,
        2 b,
          3 j, 3 k;

IBM3328I W Neither the LIKE reference nor any of its substructures can
be declared with the LIKE attribute.

LIKE from LIKE is not supported.

    dcl
      1 a,
        2 b1 like c, 2 b2 like c,
      1 c,
        2 d fixed bin, 2 e fixed bin;
    dcl
      1 x like a;

IBM3329I W The LIKE reference must not be a member of a structure or
union declared with the LIKE attribute.

LIKE from LIKE is not supported.

IBM3330I W The LIKE reference is unknown.

The LIKE reference must be known in the block containing the LIKE
attribute specification.

IBM3331I W The INCLUDE file filename will be deprecated.

The named INCLUDE file was specified in the INCLUDE suboption of the
DEPRECATENEXT option, and so any attempt to include it is flagged.

IBM3332I W The END statement has no matching BEGIN, DO, PACKAGE, PROC,
or SELECT. This may indicate a problem with the syntax of a previous
statement.

An END statement has been found that matches no previous statement. This
may indicate that a previous statement has a syntax error such as a
missing closing semicolon.

IBM3333I W One or more END statements are missing. This may indicate a
problem with the syntax of a previous statement.

The source ended without closing END statements for all the open statement
groups. This may indicate that a previous statement has a syntax error
such as a missing closing semicolon.

IBM3334I W The ENTRY named variable will be deprecated.

The named ENTRY was specified in the ENTRY suboption of the DEPRECATENEXT
option, and so any use of it is flagged.

IBM3500I E note

The largest accepted value for an integer with an G suffix is 2G. The
specified value is replaced by 1G.

This message is used to report DB2 or CICS backend messages with a return
code of 8.

IBM3508I E Numeric precision of 0 replaced by 1.

IBM3501I E note

Numeric precisions must be positive.

This message is used by %NOTE statements with a return code of 8.

IBM3509I E DECLARE statement has invalid syntax. No variables in it may
be used in EXEC SQL statements.

IBM3502I E An integer with a K suffix must have no more than 7 digits.

An integer of the form dddK must have no more than 7 digits. The specified
value is replaced by 1K.

IBM3503I E In an integer with a K suffix the digits must specify a value
less than or equal to 2097152.

The largest accepted value for an integer with a K suffix is 2097152K. The
specified value is replaced by 2097151K.

IBM3504I E An integer with an M suffix must have no more than 4 digits.

Fix the DECLARE statement so that it is syntactically correct.

IBM3510I E keyword statement is not allowed where an executable
statement is required. A null statement will be inserted before the
keyword statement.

In certain contexts, for example after an IF-THEN clause, only executable
statements are permitted. A DECLARE, DEFINE, DEFAULT or FORMAT statement
has been found in one of these contexts. A null statement, (a statement
consisting of only a semicolon) will be inserted before the offending
statement.

An integer of the form dddM must have no more than 4 digits. The specified
value is replaced by 1M.

IBM3511I E COUNTER value would exceed 99999. It will be reset to 0.

IBM3505I E In an integer with an M suffix the digits must specify a
value less than or equal to 2048.

The largest accepted value for an integer with an M suffix is 2048M. The
specified value is replaced by 2047M.

IBM3506I E An integer with a G suffix must have only 1 digit.

An integer of the form dddG must have no more than 1 digit. The specified
value is replaced by 1G.

IBM3507I E In an integer with an G suffix the digits must specify a
value less than or equal to 2.

The COUNTER built-in function should not be invoked more than 99999 times.

IBM3512I E Multiple closure of groups is not allowed under
RULES(NOMULTICLOSE).

Under RULES(NOMULTICLOSE), there should be no multiple closure of groups
in your source program.

IBM3514I E Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in is negative. It will
be changed to 0.

The second argument to built-in functions such as COPY and REPEAT must
be nonnegative.

    x = copy( y, -1 );

IBM3521I E Structure level greater than 255 specified. It is replaced
by 255.

The maximum structure level supported is 255.

IBM3515I E Scale factor is bigger than 127. It is replaced by 127.

    dcl
      1 a,
        256 b, 2 c,

Scale factors must be between -128 and 127 inclusive.

IBM3516I E Scale factor is less than -128. It is replaced by -128.

IBM3522I E A DECIMAL exponent is required.

An E in a FLOAT constant must be followed by at least one decimal digit
(optionally preceded by a sign).

IBM3523I E Scale factors must be between -128 and 127 inclusive.

IBM3517I E Sole bound specified for dimension dimension number of array
variable name is less than 1.  An upper bound of 1 is assumed.

A second argument to the BUILTIN name built-in must be supplied for
arrays with more than one dimension. A value of 1 is assumed.

The default lower bound is 1, but the upper bound must be greater than
the lower bound.

The LBOUND, HBOUND, and DIMENSION built-in functions require two arguments
when applied to arrays having more than one dimension.

    dcl a(5,10) fixed bin; do i = 1 to lbound(a);

    dcl x(-5) fixed bin;

IBM3518I E identifier does not conform to the NAMEPREFIX option.

If the NAMEPREFIX option is specified, the names of all macro variables
and procedures must start with the character specified in that option.

IBM3519I E Characters in B3 literals must be 0-7.

IBM3524I E Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in is not positive. A
value of 1 is assumed.

The DIMENSION, HBOUND and LBOUND built-in functions require that the
second argument be positive.

IBM3525I E Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in is greater than the
number of dimensions for the first argument. A value of dimension count
is assumed.

In a B3 literal, each character must be either 0-7.

IBM3520I E Structure level of 0 replaced by 1.

Structure level numbers must be positive.

The second argument to the LBOUND, HBOUND, and DIMENSION built-in
functions must be no greater than the number of dimensions of their
array arguments.

    dcl a(5,10) fixed bin; do i = 1 to lbound(a,3);

IBM3531I E identifier is a statement label.  ACTIVATE and DEACTIVATE
are invalid for labels.

IBM3526I E Repeated declaration of identifier is invalid and will
be ignored.

Labels may not be activated.

IBM3533I E THEN clause outside of an open IF statement is ignored.

Level 1 variable names must not be repeated in the same block.

    dcl a char, a fixed;

THEN clauses are valid only immediately after an IF <expression>.

IBM3527I E Missing THEN assumed.

    %if a > b; %then;

THEN keyword must be part of any IF statement.

IBM3528I E Duplicate specification of arithmetic precision. Subsequent
specification ignored.

IBM3534I E ELSE clause outside of an open IF- THEN statement is ignored.

ELSE clauses are valid only immediately after an IF- THEN statement.

The precision attribute must be specified only once in a DECLARE
statement.

    do; if a > b then; end; else a = 0;

    dcl a fixed(15) bin(31);

IBM3529I E Scale factors are not allowed in FLOAT declarations.

Scale factors are valid only in declarations of FIXED BIN or FIXED
DEC. The first declaration below is invalid and should be changed to
one of the subsequent declarations.

    dcl a1 float dec(15,2);

    dcl a2 fixed dec(15,2); dcl a3 float dec(15);

IBM3530I E identifier is an array. ACTIVATE and DEACTIVATE are invalid
for arrays.

Only scalars may be activated.

IBM3536I E END label is not a label on any open group.

A Label on END statement must match a LABEL on an open DO, PROCEDURE,
or SELECT statement.

    a: do;
      ...
    end b;

IBM3537I E An END statement may be missing after an OTHERWISE unit. One
will be inserted.

After an OTHERWISE unit in a SELECT statement, only an END statement
is valid.

    select;
      when ( ... )
        do; end;

      otherwise
        do; end;
    display( .... );

IBM3538I E %END statement found without any open %PROCEDURE, %DO or
%SELECT statements. It will be ignored.

Any %END statement should be part of a %PROCEDURE-%END, %DO-%END or
%SELECT- %END group.

IBM3539I E STRINGSIZE condition raised while evaluating expression.
Result is truncated.

During the conversion of a user expression during the compilation, the
target string was found to be shorter than the source, thus causing the
STRINGSIZE condition to be raised.

IBM3540I E STRINGRANGE condition raised while evaluating expression.
Arguments are adjusted to fit.

statement. The statement will be ignored.

ITERATE/LEAVE statements are valid only inside DO groups.

    %a: do jx = 1 to 1729; %end; %leave a;

IBM3544I E GX literals should contain a multiple of 4 hex digits.

GX literals must represent graphic strings and hence must contain a
multiple of 4 hex digits.

    x = '00'gx;

IBM3545I E Upper bound for dimension dimension number of array variable
name is less than lower bound.  Bounds will be reversed.

If all the arguments in a SUBSTR reference are constants or restricted
expressions, the reference will be evaluated at compile- time and the
STRINGRANGE condition will occur if the arguments do not comply with
the rules described for the SUBSTR built-in function.

    a = substr( 'abcdef', 5, 4 );

IBM3542I E LEAVE/ITERATE label is not a label on any open DO group.

A variable has been declared with an upper bound that is less than its
lower bound. The upper and lower bounds will be swapped in order to
correct this. For example, DECLARE x(3:1) will be changed to DECLARE
x(1:3).

IBM3546I E Identifier is too long. It will be collapsed to identifier.

All identifiers must be contained in 31 bytes or less.  PL/I DBCS
identifiers must have 14 or fewer DBCS characters.

IBM3547I E B assumed to complete iSUB.

LEAVE/ITERATE must specify a label on an open DO loop.

    %a: do jx = 1 to 1729;
      %leave b;
    %end;

There is no language element of the form 1su.

    dcl a(10) def b(1su, 1sub );

IBM3543I E ITERATE/LEAVE statement is invalid outside an open DO

IBM3548I E Digit in BINARY constant is not zero or one.

In a BINARY constant, each digit must be a zero or one.

IBM3549I E Characters in BIT literals must be 0 or 1.

The indicated character is not part of the PL/I character set, but was
immediately followed by the same character. This can occur if a program
containing an OR symbol is ported from another machine and this symbol
is translated to a character that is not part of the PL/I character
set. Using the OR compiler option can help avoid this problem.

In a BIT literal, each character must be either zero or one.

IBM3557I E IBM3550I E

Character with decimal value n does not belong to the PL/I character
set. It will be ignored.

Character with decimal value n does not belong to the PL/I character
set. It is assumed to be a NOT symbol.

The indicated character is not part of the PL/I character set. This can
occur if a program containing NOT or OR symbols is ported from another
machine and those symbols are translated to a character that is not
part of the PL/I character set. Using the NOT and OR compiler options
can help avoid this problem.

IBM3551I E Characters in hex literals must be 0-9 or A-F.

The indicated character is not part of the PL/I character set, but was
immediately followed by an =, < or > symbol. This can occur if a program
containing a NOT symbol is ported from another machine and this symbol
is translated to a character that is not part of the PL/I character
set. Using the NOT compiler option can help avoid this problem.

IBM3558I E WX literals should contain a multiple of 4 hex digits.

In a hex literal, each character must be either 0-9 or A-F.

IBM3552I E The statement element character is invalid. The statement
will be ignored.

The statement entered could not be parsed because the specified element
is invalid.

IBM3553I E Use of underscore as initial character in an identifier
accepted although invalid under LANGLVL(SAA).

Under LANGLVL(SAA), identifiers must start with an alphabetic character
or with one of the extralingual characters. They may not start with
an underscore.  Under LANGLVL(SAA2), identifiers may start with an
underscore, although names starting with _IBM are reserved for use by IBM.

IBM3556I E Character with decimal value n does not belong to the PL/I
character set. It is assumed to be an OR symbol.

WX literals must represent unicode strings and hence must contain a
multiple of 4 hex digits.

    x = '00'wx;

IBM3559I E RULES(NOGOTO) violation: the use of EXEC SQL WHENEVER
statements violates RULES(NOGOTO).

EXEC SQL WHENEVER statements will lead to the generation of GOTO
statements and hence violate RULES(NOGOTO).

IBM3560I E RULES(NOGOTO) violation: the use of EXEC CICS HANDLE CONDITION
statements violates RULES(NOGOTO).

EXEC CICS HANDLE CONDITION statements create a form of GOTO and hence
violate RULES(NOGOTO).

IBM3565I E Statement type resolution requires too many lexical units to

be examined. The statement will be ignored.

    dcl x char(-10);

To determine if a statement is an assignment or another PL/I statement,
many elements of the statement may need to be examined. If too many have
to be examined, the compiler will flag the statement as in error. For
instance, the following statement could be a DECLARE until the equal
sign is encountered by the lexer.

    dcl ( a, b, c ) = d;

IBM3571I E The SQL and PL/I float options are inconsistent.

The compiler option DEFAULT(IEEE|HEXADEC) does not match the SQL
preprocessor option FLOAT(IEEE| S390). Make sure they are consistent
and resubmit your job.

IBM3572I E Initial level number in a structure is not 1.

IBM3567I E Statements inside a SELECT must be preceded by a WHEN or an
OTHERWISE clause.

The level-1 DECLARE statement might be missing.

A WHEN or OTHERWISE might be missing.

    select;
      i = i + 1; when ( a > 0 )
        ...

    dcl
      2 a,
        3 b, 3 c,

IBM3573I E IBM3568I E

Under RULES(NOLAXFIELDS), EXEC SQL SELECT statements must specify a list
of field names.

Elements with level numbers greater than 1 follow an element without a
level number. A level number of 1 is assumed.

A structure level is probably missing.

Under RULES(NOLAXFIELDS), EXEC SQL SELECT must be followed by one or
more field names, not by an asterisk.

IBM3569I E Under RULES(NOLAXFIELDS), EXEC SQL INSERT INTO statements
must specify a list of field names.

    dcl
        a, 2 b, 2 c,

IBM3574I E Variables declared without a name must be structure members
or followed by a substructure list.

Under RULES(NOLAXFIELDS), EXEC SQL INSERT INTO <table-name> must be
followed by one or more field names.

IBM3570I E Extent expression is negative. It will be replaced by the
constant 1.

The use of an asterisk in place of a name is permitted only for
structure or union names or for members of structures or unions. An
asterisk must not be used for a level-1 structure name that specifies
the LIKE attribute.

Extents must be positive.

    dcl a fixed bin(15), * char(20) static
init('who can use me');

IBM3575I E Duplicate specification of attribute. Subsequent specification
ignored.

Attributes such as CHAR must not be repeated for an element of a DECLARE
statement.

    dcl a char(10) char(20);

In a statement-form procedure invocation, any keyword specified must be
the name of a parameter for that procedure.

    %p: proc( a ) stmt returns( char );
       dcl a char; return( a );
    %end; %act p;

    display( p a(17) b(29); );

IBM3576I E The SQL statement is empty and is ignored.

IBM3582I E Parameter identifier is not declared.

EXEC SQL statements must consist of more than merely EXEC SQL.

IBM3577I E INCONLY option is ignored because preceded by other options.

The INCONLY option must be specified without any other options.

IBM3580I E Parameter keyword may not be set more than once. First setting
is assumed.

In a statement-form procedure invocation, each parameter must be specified
only once. Any subsequent specifications will be ignored. In the example
code, 17 would be returned for both invocations of P.

    %p: proc( a ) stmt returns( char );
       dcl a char; return( a );
    %end; %act p;

    display( p a(17) a(29); );

    display( p(17) a(29); );

Each parameter in a procedure should be declared.

    %a: proc( b, c );
      dcl b fixed;
    %end;

IBM3583I E Labels on keyword statements are invalid and ignored.

Labels are not permitted on DECLARE statements or on WHEN and OTHERWISE
clauses.

IBM3589I E The identifier identifier is not the name of a built-in
function. The BUILTIN attribute will be ignored.

The BUILTIN attribute can be applied only to identifiers that are the
names of built-in functions or subroutines.

IBM3590I E The attribute keyword is not supported and will be ignored.

The named attribute is not supported by the macro facility.

IBM3581I E Unknown keyword in statement- form procedure invocation.
keyword and any argument are ignored.

    %dcl a char external;

IBM3591I E Right parenthesis will be assumed at end of argument list.

IBM3607I E A right parenthesis is probably missing. If this occurs in
the source, all the characters after the unmatched left parenthesis in
the source will be interpreted as parameters to the function. If this
occurs in a replacement string, all the characters after the unmatched
left parenthesis in the string will be interpreted as parameters to
the function.

IBM3603I E The end of the source was reached before the logical end
of the program. Null statements and END statements will be inserted as
necessary to complete the program.

The source should contain END statements for all PROCEDUREs, DO groups,
and SELECT statements, as well as statements for all IF-THEN and ELSE
clauses.

IBM3604I E The procedure name proc-name has already been declared.
The explicit declaration of the procedure name will not be accepted.

Declarations for internal procedures are not permitted.

    a: proc;
      dcl b entry options(byvalue); b: proc;

IBM3605I E The type type type type name is already defined. The
redefinition is ignored.

An ORDINAL type may be defined only once in any block.

IBM3606I E Repeated declaration of identifier is invalid. The name will
be replaced by an asterisk.

The variable names at any given sublevel within a structure or union
must be unique.

    dcl 1 a, 2 b fixed, 2 b float;

UNSIGNED attribute for type type type type name conflicts with negative
INITIAL values and is ignored.

If an ORDINAL type is declared with the UNSIGNED attribute, any INITIAL
values specified must be nonnegative.

IBM3608I E PRECISION specified for type type type type name is too small
to cover its INITIAL values and is adjusted to fit.

An ORDINAL type must have a precision larger enough to cover the range
of values defined for it.

   define ordinal
     colors
       ( red      init(0),
         orange   init(256) yellow   init(512) ) unsigned prec(8);

IBM3609I E A SELECT statement may be missing. A SELECT statement,
without an expression, will be inserted.

A WHEN or OTHERWISE clause has been found outside of a SELECT statement.

IBM3610I E Semicolon inserted after ELSE keyword.

An END statement enclosing a statement such as DO or SELECT has been
found before the statement required after ELSE.

    do;
      if a > b then
        ...
      else
    end;

IBM3612I E Semicolon inserted after OTHERWISE keyword.

An END statement might be misplaced or a semicolon might be missing.

Otherwise the STRINGRANGE condition would be raised.

IBM3613I E Semicolon inserted after THEN keyword.

IBM3620I E Third argument in SUBSTR reference is too big. It will be
trimmed to fit.

An END statement might be misplaced or a semicolon might be missing.

IBM3614I E Semicolon inserted after WHEN clause.

Otherwise the STRINGRANGE condition would be raised.

IBM3621I E More than 15 dimensions have been specified. Excess will
be ignored.

An END statement might be misplaced or a semicolon might be missing.

IBM3615I E Source file does not end with the logical end of the program.

The source file contains statements after the END statement that closed
the first PACKAGE or PROCEDURE. These statements will be ignored, but
their presence may indicate a programming error.

The maximum number of dimensions allowed for a variable, including all
inherited dimensions, is 15.

IBM3624I E End-of-comment marker found when there are no open
comments. Marker will be ignored.

An */ was found when there was no open comment.

IBM3616I E Subscripts have been specified for the variable variable name,
but it is not an array variable.

IBM3625I E There is no compiler directive directive. Input up to the
next semicolon will be ignored.

Subscripts can be specified only for elements of an array.

See the Language Reference Manual for the list of supported compiler
directives.

IBM3617I E Second argument in SUBSTR reference is less than 1. It will
be replaced by 1.

IBM3626I E Listing control statement must start with a percent symbol.

Otherwise the STRINGRANGE condition would be raised.

A listing control statement, even when in a preprocessor procedure,
must be preceded by a "%".

IBM3618I E Second argument in SUBSTR reference is too big. It will be
trimmed to fit.

    %a: proc;
      skip;
    %end;

Otherwise the STRINGRANGE condition would be raised.

IBM3619I E Third argument in SUBSTR reference is less than 0. It will
be replaced by 0.

IBM3628I E X literals should contain a multiple of 2 hex digits.

An X literal may not contain an odd number of digits.

IBM3638I E Excess arguments for ENTRY ENTRY name ignored.

IBM3650I E keyword keyword accepted although invalid under LANGLVL(SAA).

More arguments were specified in an ENTRY reference than were defined
as parameters in that ENTRY's declaration.

The indicated keyword (UNSIGNED in the example below) is not defined in
the SAA level-1 language.

    dcl e entry( fixed bin ); call e( 1, 2 );

    dcl x fixed bin unsigned;

IBM3639I E Excess arguments for BUILTIN name built-in ignored.

IBM3651I E Use of S, D and Q constants accepted although invalid under
LANGLVL(SAA).

More arguments were specified for the indicated built- in function than
are supported by that built-in function.

The definition of the SAA level-1 language does not include S, D, and
Q floating-point constants.

    i = acos( j, k );

IBM3640I E The attribute attribute is invalid if it is not followed by
an element with a greater logical level.

IBM3652I E Use of underscores in constants accepted although invalid
under LANGLVL(SAA).

The definition of the SAA level-1 language does not permit using
underscores in numeric and hex constants.

The named attribute is valid only on parent structures.

IBM3653I E Use of asterisks for names in declares accepted although
invalid under LANGLVL(SAA).

    dcl
      1 a,
        2 b union,
          2 c1  fixed bin(31), 2 c2  float bin(21),
        ...

IBM3641I E Level number following LIKE specification is greater than
the level number for the LIKE specification. LIKE attribute is ignored.

LIKE cannot be specified on a parent structure or union.

    dcl
      1 a like x,
        2 b, 2 c,

The definition of the SAA level-1 language does not permit using asterisks
for structure element names.

IBM3654I E Use of XN constants accepted although invalid under
LANGLVL(SAA).

The definition of the SAA level-1 language does not include XN constants.

IBM3656I E Use of 3 arguments with BUILTIN name built-in accepted although
invalid under LANGLVL(SAA).

Under LANGLVL(SAA), the VERIFY and INDEX built-in functions are supposed
to have exactly 2 arguments.

     i = verify( s, j, k );

IBM3657I E Use of 1 argument with BUILTIN name built-in accepted although
invalid under LANGLVL(SAA).

Under LANGLVL(SAA), the DIM, LBOUND and HBOUND built-in functions are
supposed to have 2 arguments.

     i = dim( a );

IBM3658I E The INCLUDE file filename has been deprecated.

The named INCLUDE file was specified in the INCLUDE suboption of the
DEPRECATE option, and so any attempt to include it is flagged.

IBM3659I E The EXEC SQL statement statement has been deprecated.

The named statement was specified in the STMT suboption of the DEPRECATE
option, and so any occurrence of it is flagged.

IBM3660I E The ENTRY named variable has been deprecated.

that starts a host variable reference.

A colon in an EXEC SQL statement must be followed by a host variable
reference, and such a reference must start with an identifier.

IBM3752I S Dot-qualified reference implies too many structure levels.

Structures are limited to at most 15 logical levels, and so any
dot-qualified reference must have at most 14 dots (or else it would
imply the structure had at least 16 logical levels).

IBM3753I S Length in SQL TYPE IS type name is too large.

The maximum length for BIN is 255 and for VARBINARY 32704. See the
Programming Guide for the maximum lengths for BLOBs, CLOBs, and DBCLOBs.

IBM3754I S SQL TYPE IS type name must be followed by an opening left
parenthesis.

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS type( length ).

IBM3755I S SQL TYPE IS type name must have an integer specifying its
length after the opening left parenthesis.

The named ENTRY was specified in the ENTRY suboption of the DEPRECATE
option, and so any use of it is flagged.

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS type( length ).

IBM3661I E Invalid use of question mark.

IBM3756I S Question marks are valid in the source only if part of one
of the trigraphs ??( or ??).

SQL TYPE IS type name must have a closing right parenthesis after the
integer specifying its length.

IBM3750I S note

This message is used to report DB2 or CICS backend messages with a return
code of 12.

IBM3751I S A colon in an EXEC SQL statement must be followed by an
identifier

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS type( length ).

IBM3757I S SQL TYPE IS XML AS type name must be followed by an opening
left parenthesis.

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS XML AS type( length ).

IBM3758I S SQL TYPE IS XML AS type name must have an integer specifying
its length after the opening left parenthesis.

The compilation requires more virtual memory than is available. It may
help to specify one or more of the following compiler options: NOINSOURCE,
NOXREF, NOATTRIBUTES, and/or NOAGGREGATE

IBM3764I S BUILTIN name argument must be a parameter.

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS XML AS type( length ).

An expression contains the named built-in function with an argument that
is not a parameter.

IBM3759I S SQL TYPE IS XML AS type name must have a closing right
parenthesis after the integer specifying its length.

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS XML AS type( length ).

IBM3765I S BUILTIN name argument must be a reference.

An expression contains the named built-in function with an argument that
is not a reference.

IBM3766I S Aggregate contains more than 15 logical levels.

IBM3760I S Too few arguments have been specified for the ENTRY ENTRY name.

The number of arguments must match the number of parameters in the
ENTRY declaration.

The maximum physical level allowed is 255, but the maximum logical level
is 15.

IBM3767I S Length in SQL TYPE IS type name must be greater than zero.

IBM3761I S Procedures may not be nested.

Macro procedures may not be nested.

IBM3762I S No percent statements are allowed inside procedures.

The length in BIN, VARBIN, BLOB, CLOB, and DBCLOB types must be positive.

IBM3768I S The use of asterisks as subscripts is not permitted in the
macro facility.

Inside a procedure, statements should not begin with a percent. The %DCL
in the example below should be just DCL.

     %a: proc( x ) returns( char );
       %dcl x char; return( '<' || x || '>' );
     %end;

In the macro facility, all subscripts must be scalar expressions.

IBM3769I S Argument to BUILTIN name built- in must have type CHARACTER(1)
NONVARYING.

This applies to the RANK built-in function.

IBM3763I S Not enough virtual memory is available to continue the compile.

IBM3770I S First argument to BUILTIN name built-in must be an array.

An expression contains the named built-in function with a first
argument that is not an array. This message applies, for instance,
to the DIMENSION, HBOUND, and LBOUND built-in functions.

The maximum length of the file specification is 8 characters.

IBM3780I S File specification missing after %INCLUDE.

IBM3771I S note

This message is used by %NOTE statements with a return code of 12.

IBM3772I S Third argument to BUILTIN name built-in would force
STRINGRANGE.

If a third argument is given for one of the built-in functions INDEX or
VERIFY, it must be positive.

%INCLUDE must be followed by a file name, not just a semicolon.

IBM3781I S Procedures may have no more than 63 parameters.

The excess parameters will be removed from the proc statement.

IBM3782I S SQL TYPE IS XML must be followed by the keyword AS.

IBM3773I S Second argument to BUILTIN name built-in must be nonnegative.

The second argument for the built-in functions CHARACTER, BIT, and
GRAPHIC must be zero or greater.

IBM3774I S Too few arguments have been specified for the BUILTIN name
built-in.

Supply the minimum number of arguments required.

IBM3775I S The preprocessor name preprocessor requires the DFT(EBCDIC)
option.

The use of the DFT(ASCII) option with either the CICS or SQL preprocessor
is not supported.

IBM3778I S Syntax of the %INCLUDE statement is incorrect.

%INCLUDE must be followed by a name and either a semicolon or else a
second name in parenthesis and then a semicolon.

IBM3779I S File specification after %INCLUDE is too long.

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS XML AS type( length ).

IBM3783I S SQL TYPE IS XML AS must be followed by a valid type name.

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS XML AS type( length ).

IBM3784I S SQL TYPE IS TABLE must be followed by the keyword LIKE.

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS TABLE LIKE table- name AS LOCATOR.

IBM3785I S SQL TYPE IS TABLE LIKE must be followed by a table name.

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS TABLE LIKE table- name AS LOCATOR.

IBM3786I S SQL TYPE IS TABLE LIKE must be followed by the keyword AS
after the table name.

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS TABLE LIKE table- name AS LOCATOR.

IBM3787I S SQL TYPE IS TABLE must be followed by the keyword LOCATOR
after the table name and the AS keyword.

IBM3792I S Array variable name has too many elements. Bounds set to 1.

Arrays are limited to 2**20 elements.

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS TABLE LIKE table- name AS LOCATOR.

IBM3793I S Too few subscripts specified for the variable variable name.

IBM3788I S SQL TYPE IS must be followed by a valid type name.

The keywords SQL TYPE IS must be followed by a type name such as XML.

IBM3789I S Index number index number into the variable variable name is
less than the lower bound for that dimension.

The number of subscripts given for a variable must match that variable's
number of dimensions

IBM3794I S Too many subscripts specified for the variable variable name.

The number of subscripts given for a variable must match that variable's
number of dimensions

IBM3795I S Shift-out code has no closing shift- in code before the
right margin.

Executing such a statement would most likely cause a protection exception.

    %dcl a(5:10)  fixed;

    %a(1) = 0;

IBM3790I S Index number index number into the variable variable name is
greater than the upper bound for that dimension.

Executing such a statement would most likely cause a protection exception.

    %dcl a(5:10)  fixed;

    %a(20) = 0;

Every DBCS shift-out code between the margins must have a matching DBCS
shift-in code also between the margins.

IBM3796I S Array expressions cannot be assigned to non-arrays, and if
any target in a multiple assignment is an array, then all the targets
must be arrays.

Array expressions may not, for instance, be assigned to structures
or scalars.

IBM3797I S RETURN statement without an expression is invalid inside a
PROCEDURE that specified the RETURNS attribute.

IBM3791I S Each dimension of an array must contain no more than 2147483647
elements.

All RETURN statements inside functions must specify a value to be
returned.

    %a: proc returns( fixed );

It must be possible to compute the value of the DIMENSION built-in
function for an array. For example, in DECLARE A(x:y), (y-x+1) must be
less than 214748648.

      return;
    %end;

IBM3798I S RETURN statement with an expression is invalid inside a

PROCEDURE that did not specify the RETURNS attribute.

    %a = '0'; %a ||= '1';

A statement of the form RETURN(x) is valid inside only PROCEDUREs that
are defined with a RETURNS attribute.

    %a: proc;

      return( 'this is invalid' );
    %end;

IBM3799I S The DECLARE statement for the host variable reference is not
inside an SQL DECLARE SECTION.

Under the SQL option STDSQL(YES), all host variables must be declared
between SQL BEGIN DECLARE SECTION and SQL END DECLARE SECTION statements.

IBM3804I S Target in arithmetic-equals assignment must have type fixed.

Compound arithmetic assignments with character targets are not supported.

    %dcl a char;

    %a = '0'; %a += '1';

IBM3805I S SQL TYPE IS XML type must be followed by the keyword LARGE.

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS XML AS type LARGE OBJECT( length ).

IBM3800I S Function function name contains no RETURN statement.

IBM3806I S SQL TYPE IS XML type LARGE must be followed by the keyword
OBJECT.

Functions must contain at least one RETURN statement.

IBM3801I S Target in assignment is invalid.

The target in an assignment must be character or fixed element
reference. Pseudovariables are not supported.

IBM3802I S Statement labels may not be used in expressions.

Statement labels must be used only in GOTO, LEAVE and ITERATE statements.

IBM3803I S Target in concatenate-equals assignment must have type char.

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS XML AS type LARGE OBJECT( length ).

IBM3807I S SQL TYPE IS CHARACTER must be followed by the keyword LARGE.

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS CHARACTER LARGE OBJECT( length ).

IBM3808I S SQL TYPE IS BINARY must be followed by the keyword LARGE or
by a length enclosed in parentheses.

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS BINARY LARGE OBJECT( length ) or SQL
TYPE IS BINARY( length ).

IBM3809I S SQL TYPE IS type LARGE must be followed by the keyword OBJECT.

Compound concatenate assignments with fixed targets are not supported.

    %dcl a fixed;

The correct syntax is SQL TYPE IS type LARGE OBJECT( length ).

IBM3810I S Statement has too many labels.

The compiler's limit on the number of labels on a statement has been
exceeded. Reduce the number of labels on the statement.

The TRANSLATE built-in function is not supported if the second or third
argument is longer than 32767 characters.

IBM3817I S Result of BUILTIN name would exceed maximum string length.

IBM3811I S Expression contains too many nested subexpressions.

The compiler's space for evaluating expressions has been
exhausted. Rewrite the expression in terms of simpler expressions.

IBM3812I S Result of concatenating a string of length string length to
a string of length string length would produce a string that is too long.

The result of a concatenation must not have a length greater than the
maximum allowed for a string.

IBM3813I S Result of BUILTIN name applied repetition value times to a
string of length string length would produce a string that is too long.

The result of a COMMENT or QUOTE built-in function must not be a string
that would have length greater than the supported maximum.

IBM3820I S Under the INCONLY option, the use of INCLUDE or XINCLUDE as
a macro procedure name is invalid unless the colon follows immediately
after the name.

If you must use INCLUDE or XINCLUDE as a macro name, put the colon on
the same line as the name.

IBM3821I S Under the INCONLY option, the use of INCLUDE or XINCLUDE as
a macro statement label is invalid unless the colon follows immediately
after the name.

The result of COPY and REPEAT must not have a length greater than the
maximum allowed for a string.

If you must use INCLUDE or XINCLUDE as a macro statement label, put the
colon on the same line as the name.

IBM3814I S Unsupported use of aggregate expression.

IBM3822I S The only valid aggregate expression is the use of an array
name as the first argument to the HBOUND or LBOUND built-in functions.

IBM3815I S Operand in bit operation must have length less than 32768.

Bit operations are limited to strings of length 32767 or less.

Under the INCONLY option, the use of INCLUDE or XINCLUDE as a macro
variable that is the target of an assignment is invalid unless the equals
sign follows immediately after the name.

If you must use INCLUDE or XINCLUDE as a macro variable name, put the
equals sign in the assignment on the same line as the name. For example,
change the first assignment below into the second.

IBM3816I S Second and third arguments to the TRANSLATE built-in function
must have length less than 32768.

    %xinclude
      = 17;

    %xinclude = 17;

IBM3823I S A QUALIFY block may contain only DEFINE statements, DECLARE

statements, and nested QUALIFY blocks.

DEFAULT statements, for example, are not allowed in QUALIFY blocks.

IBM3824I S A name declared in a QUALIFY block must be a scalar.

A DECLARE statement in a QUALIFY block cannot specify a structure,
union or array.

IBM3825I S A name declared in a QUALIFY block must have the VALUE
attribute.

A DECLARE statement in a QUALIFY block cannot specify a variable or a
constant unless it has the VALUE attribute.

IBM3826I S The type name type name is ambiguous.

Enough qualification must be provided to make any type reference unique.

IBM3827I S type name is a type name, but not the name of an ORDINAL type.

In a declare statement that specifies ORDINAL x, x must be the name of
an ORDINAL type.

IBM3837I S GOTO target is inside a (different) DO loop.

The nesting of PROCEDURE, DO, SELECT and similar statements is greater
than that supported by the compiler. Rewrite the program so that it is
less complicated.

IBM3844I S The function name built-in is not supported.

Support for the indicated built-in function has been discontinued.

IBM3846I S The keyword statement is not supported.

Support for the indicated statement has been discontinued.

IBM3848I S Use of iSUB is not supported.

iSUB is only supported in syntax checking.

IBM3849I S type name is not a type name.

If TYPE x is used in a declaration, x must be a defined type.

IBM3850I S TYPEs must be defined before their use.

The DEFINE STRUCTURE or DEFINE ALIAS statement for a type x must precede
any of use of x as attribute type. The following two statements should
be in the opposite order.

The target of a GOTO cannot be inside a DO loop unless the GOTO itself
is in the same DO loop.

IBM3841I S The INCLUDE file include-file-name could not be opened.

    dcl x type point;

    define structure
      1 point
        2 x  fixed bin(31), 2 y  fixed bin(31);

The INCLUDE file could not be found, or if found, it could not be opened.

IBM3842I S Statements are nested too deep.

IBM3851I S INITIAL values for type type type type name must be in
increasing order.

        2 lower_right  type point;

Any values specified in INITIAL clauses in an ORDINAL definition must
be in strictly increasing order.

IBM3858I S IBM3852I S

INITIAL values for type type type type name must be less than 2G.

All the names in the ORDINAL ordinal-name have been previously declared.

ORDINAL values must fit in the range of a FIXED BIN(31) variable.

None of the names in an ORDINAL should have been declared elsewhere. If
they are, perhaps the ORDINAL definition has been accidentally repeated.

IBM3853I S Nesting of DO statements exceeds the maximum.

IBM3859I S Storage attributes are invalid in structure definition.

DO statements can be nested only 100 deep. Simplify the program.

IBM3854I S Nesting of IF statements exceeds the maximum.

IF statements can be nested only 100 deep. Simplify the program.

IBM3855I S Nesting of SELECT statements exceeds the maximum.

Storage attributes, such as AUTOMATIC and BYADDR, must be specified with
variables declared with structure type.

IBM3860I S DEFINE STRUCTURE may not specify an array of structures.

The level 1 name in a structure definition may not have the DIMENSION
attribute.

IBM3861I S Open of dbrm dataset failed.

SELECT statements can be nested only 50 deep.  Simplify the program.

IBM3856I S Nesting of blocks exceeds the maximum.

Blocks must be nested only 30 deep.

IBM3857I S Only one description is allowed in a structure definition.

The syntax allows the name in a structure definition to be followed by
a description list, but that description list must consist of exactly
one structure description.  The following is invalid:

    define structure
      1 point
        2 x  fixed bin(31), 2 y  fixed bin(31),
      1 rectangle
        2 upper_left   type point,

The open of the .dbrm dataset to be used by the SQL preprocessor failed. A
possible cause might be lack of write authoriy to the compile directory.

IBM3862I S Dynamic allocation of DBRMLIB failed with the SVC 99 info
code info-code and the SVC 99 error code error-code .

The dynamic allocation of the DBRMLIB failed with the indicated SVC 99
info and error codes.

IBM3863I S The DBRMLIB compiler option must be specified.

In order to perform a compile using the SQL preprocessor without the
INCONLY option, your must specify the DBRMLIB compiler option.

IBM3870I S The FETCH of the CICS backend failed.

Check that the CICS modules are accessible, otherwise report this error
to IBM.

IBM3871I S The CICS backend reported an internal error while attempting
to perform its initialization.

Report this error to IBM.

IBM3872I S The CICS backend reported an internal error while attempting
to parse its options.

Report this error to IBM.

IBM3873I S The CICS backend reported an internal error while attempting
to build and emit the local declares.

Report this error to IBM.

IBM3874I S The CICS backend reported an internal error while attempting
to translate an EXEC statement.

Report this error to IBM.

IBM3875I S The CICS backend reported an internal error while attempting
to translate a CICS macro (such as DFHVALUE).

Report this error to IBM.

IBM3876I S The CICS backend reported an internal error while attempting
to perform its termination.

Report this error to IBM.

IBM3877I S The SQL backend reported an internal error while attempting
to perform its initialization.

Report this error to IBM.

IBM3878I S SQL initialization did not complete successfully.

See the additional messages produced by the SQL backend.

IBM3880I S The reference reference could not be resolved.

All SQL host variables must be declared within the current block scope.

IBM3881I S The reference reference is ambiguous.

All SQL host variables must be unambiguous. This can be fixed by supplying
enough structure qualification.

IBM3882I S The indicator array reference must have only one dimension.

An indicator array in an EXEC SQL statement must not be multi-dimensional.

IBM3883I S The indicator array reference must have constant bounds.

An indicator array in an EXEC SQL statement must have bounds that are
specified simply as optionally signed integers.

IBM3884I S The indicator variable reference is used with a structure
and hence must be an array or a structure.

An indicator variable for a structure in an EXEC SQL statement must be
an array or a structure.

IBM3885I S The host variable host-variable must have only one dimension.

A host variable in an EXEC SQL statement must not be multi-dimensional.

IBM3886I S The host variable host-variable must have constant bounds.

A host variable in an EXEC SQL statement must have bounds that are
specified simply as optionally signed integers.

IBM3887I S The host variable host-variable must be CONNECTED.

A host variable in an EXEC SQL statement must be one-dimensional and
that dimension must not be specified on a parent unless the parent has
the DIMACROSS attribute.

IBM3888I S The reference host-reference has no corresponding DB2 type.

All SQL host variables must have a corresponding DB2 type. For example,
while FIXED DEC(7,-2) is valid in a PL/I declaration, there is no
corresponding DB2 type because DB2 requires that in FIXED DEC(p,q),
q is non- negative and no greater than p.

IBM3889I S The reference host-reference is a union and thus must not be
used as a host variable.

A structure may be used as a host variable only if none of its members
are structures.

IBM3893I S The reference host-reference contains unnamed elements and
thus must not be used as a host variable.

A structure may be used as a host variable only if all of its members
are named.

IBM3894I S The indicator variable reference must be FIXED BIN(15).

An indicator variable must be a native, real halfword integer.

IBM3895I S The indicator variable reference is used with an array and
hence must be an array as well.

An indicator variable in an EXEC SQL statement must be an array if it
is used with an array.

IBM3896I S All SQL host variables must have a corresponding DB2
type. There is no type matching a union.

IBM3890I S The reference host-reference is an array of structures and
thus must not be used as a host variable.

The VALUE reference host- reference could not be reduced to a character
literal and thus must not be used as a host variable.

A structure may be used as a host variable only if it is not an array.

IBM3891I S Since the structure reference host- reference contains
an array, it must not have an indicator that is a scalar or an array
of scalars.

A reference with the VALUE attribute may be used as a host variable with
the SQL characterl type if it can be reduced to a CHARACTER literal. See
the Programming Guide for more details.

IBM3897I S The VALUE reference host- reference could not be reduced to
a numeric literal and thus must not be used as a host variable.

A structure containing an array may be used as a host variable with an
indicator variable only if that indicator variable is a similar structure.

A reference with the VALUE attribute may be used as a host variable with
the SQL integer or decimal type if it can be reduced to a REAL FIXED
literal. See the Programming Guide for more details.

IBM3892I S The reference host-reference contains a substructure and thus
must not be used as a host variable.

IBM3898I S The VALUE reference host- reference does not have character,
integer or decimal type and thus must not be used as a host variable.

A reference with the VALUE attribute may be used as a host variable only
if it has a SQL type of character, integer or decimal.

IBM3899I S The reference reference name is ambiguous.

All statement labels in any block must be unique.

IBM3914I S GOTO target must be a LABEL reference.

Enough qualification must be provided to make any reference unique.

x in GOTO x must have type LABEL. x must not have type FORMAT.

IBM3915I S GOTO target must be a scalar.

IBM3900I S The dot-qualified reference reference name is unknown.

The named reference is not a member of any structure or union declared in
the block in which it is referenced or declared in any block containing
that block.

IBM3901I S The element reference name in the indicator structure must have
the same array bounds as the corresponding element in the host structure.

In :x:y, if x and y are both structures, then for any element of y that
is an array, the corresponding element of x must be an array with the
same bounds and vice versa.

IBM3902I S Argument to the BUILTIN name built-in must be a structure.

x in GOTO x must not be an array.

IBM3916I S The procedure proc-name has already been defined.

Sister procedures must have different names.

    % b: proc; % end; % b: proc; % end;

IBM3917I S Program contains no valid source lines.

The source contains either no statements or all statements that it
contains are invalid.

IBM3920I S FIXED BINARY constant contains too many digits.

The argument to the named built-in subroutine must be a structure.

IBM3903I S The indicator reference name must not be a uinon.

A FIXED BINARY constant must contain 31 or fewer digits.

In :x:y, y must not be a union.

IBM3909I S The attribute attribute conflicts with the attribute attribute.

IBM3921I S FIXED DECIMAL constant contains too many significant digits.

The maximum precision of FIXED DECIMAL constants is set by the FIXEDDEC
suboption of the LIMITS compiler option.

The named attributes, for example PARAMETER and INITIAL, are mutually
exclusive.

IBM3922I S IBM3911I S

The statement label identifier has already been declared.

Exponent in FLOAT BINARY constant contains more digits than the
implementation maximum.

The exponent in a FLOAT BINARY constant may contain no more than 5 digits.

IBM3923I S Mantissa in FLOAT BINARY constant contains more significant
digits than the implementation maximum.

The mantissa in a FLOAT BINARY constant may contain no more than 64
digits.

IBM3924I S Exponent in FLOAT DECIMAL constant contains more digits than
the implementation maximum.

The exponent in a FLOAT BINARY constant may contain no more than 4 digits.

IBM3925I S Mantissa in FLOAT DECIMAL constant contains more significant
digits than the implementation maximum.

The mantissa in a FLOAT BINARY constant may contain no more than 18
digits.

IBM3926I S Constants must not exceed 30720 bytes.

The number of bytes used to represent a constant in your program must not
exceed 30720. This limit holds even for bit strings where the internal
representation will consume only one-eighth the number of bytes as the
external representation does.

G, GX, M, A and E string suffixes are not supported.

     %a = '31'e;

IBM3929I S EXEC SQL statement must be in a PROCEDURE.

The only EXEC SQL statements allowed at the PACKAGE level are EXEC SQL
BEGIN DECLARE SECTION, EXEC SQL END DECLARE SECTION, nonexecutable EXEC
SQL DECLARE, and EXEC SQL INCLUDE other than EXEC SQL INCLUDE SQLCA and
EXEC SQL INCLUDE SQLDA.

IBM3930I S Invalid syntax in statement-form of procedure invocation. Text
up to next semicolon will be ignored.

In the invocation of a statement-form procedure, all characters that
are not part of comments or key names should be enclosed in parentheses
following one of the keys. For example, the "+" in the display statement
below should not be present.

     %a: proc( x ) stmt returns( char );
       dcl x char; return( 1729 );
     %end; %act a;

     display( a + x(5); );

IBM3931I S Under the FIXED(DEC) option, decimal constants must have no
more than 5 digits.

IBM3927I S Numeric constants must be real, unscaled and fixed.

Any complex, scaled or floating point constant will be converted to an
integer value.

Under the FIXED(BIN), decimal constants that represent any valid FIXED
BIN(31) number are supported.

IBM3934I S EXEC SQL INCLUDE statement has incorrect syntax.

     %a = 3.1415;

IBM3928I S Only B, BX and X string suffixes are supported.

EXEC SQL INCLUDE must be followed by one identifier and then by a
semicolon.

IBM3935I S The FETCH of the SQL backend failed.

    %a = a / 0;

Check that the SQL modules are accessible, otherwise report this error
to IBM.

IBM3936I S The SQL backend must be from DB2 V9 or later.

IBM3949I S Parameter name identifier appears more than once in parameter
list.

Each identifier in a parameter list must be unique.

Switch to a more current level of DB2.

    a: proc( b, c, b );

IBM3937I S EXEC SQL statement is too long.

Each EXEC SQL statement must be less than 500K bytes long.

IBM3938I S EXEC SQL statement has too many host variable references.

Each EXEC SQL statement must require no more than 10,000 tokens. Each
host variable that is a structure but not a SQLDA requires as many tokens
as it has members. All other host variables require one token.

IBM3939I S The DBNAME option must specify a valid database name.

When invoking the SQL preprocessor on Windows or AIX, the DBNAME option
must be specified, and the option must specify a valid database name.

IBM3943I S The number of error messages allowed by the FLAG option has
been exceeded.

Compilation will terminate when the number of messages has exceeded the
limit set in the FLAG compiler option.

IBM3948I S condition-name condition with ONCODE=oncode-value raised
while evaluating expression.

Evaluation of an expression raised the named condition.

IBM3950I S An asterisk iteration factor can be applied only to the last
expression in the INITIAL item list for variable-name.

Since an asterisk iteration factor completes the initialization of a
variable, it cannot be followed by more initial values.

     %dcl a(10)  fixed init( 1, 2, (*) 0, 8 );

IBM3951I S An asterisk iteration factor cannot be used in the nested
INITIAL item list for variable-name.

An asterisk iteration can be used only in a non-nested INITIAL item
list. The following example is invalid.

     %dcl a(20) fixed init( (2) ( 1, (*) 2 ) );

IBM3952I S INITIAL attribute on the parameter variable-name is invalid.

A parameter cannot have an INITIAL attribute.

IBM3953I S INITIAL list contains count items, but the array variable
name contains only array size. Excess is ignored.

IBM3962I S For an array, an INITIAL list should not contain more values
than the array has elements.

Replacement value contains no end-of-comment delimiter.  A comment
delimiter will be assumed at the end of the replacement value.

    %dcl b(5) init( (10) 0 );

IBM3956I S ITERATE is valid only for iterative DO-groups.

ITERATE is not valid inside type-I do groups.

IBM3957I S RETURN statement outside of a PROCEDURE is invalid.

RETURN statements are valid only inside procedures.

IBM3958I S INCLUDE statement inside of a PROCEDURE is invalid.

INCLUDE statements are permitted only outside any preprocessor procedures.

    %a: proc;
       include sample;
    %end;

IBM3959I S Length of parameter exceeds 32767 bytes.

Parameters to macro procedures must be no longer than 32767 bytes.

IBM3960I S End-of-source has been encountered after an unmatched comment
marker.

An end-of-comment marker is probably missing.

IBM3961I S End-of-source has been encountered after an unmatched quote.

A closing quote is probably missing.

An end-of-comment marker is probably missing.

IBM3963I S Replacement value contains no end-of-string delimiter. A
string delimiter will be assumed at the end of the replacement value.

A closing quote is probably missing.

IBM3964I S ANSWER statement outside of a PROCEDURE is invalid.

ANSWER statements are valid only inside procedures.

IBM3965I S ANSWER statement inside of a PROCEDURE with RETURNS is invalid.

ANSWER statements are not valid inside functions.

    %a: proc returns( char );
      answer( 'this is invalid' ); return( 'this is ok however' );
    %end;

    %b: proc;
      answer( 'this is valid' );
    %end;

IBM3966I S Source has caused too many rescans.

A rescan of a replacement string or a rescan of a string returned by a
preprocessor has caused further replacement leading to another rescan
etc., and the maximum depth of rescanning was exceeded. For instance,
the following macro, which is meant to count the number of dcl statements
in a compilation, would produce this message. If the %ACTIVATE statement
specified NORESCAN, it would work correctly.

    %dcl dcl_Count fixed;

    %dcl_Count = 0;

    %dcl: proc returns( char );
       dcl_count = dcl_count + 1; return( 'dcl' );
    %end;

    %activate dcl;

IBM3967I S CALL statement outside of a PROCEDURE is invalid.

CALL statements are valid only when they are inside macro procedures.

IBM3974I S Every shift-in character after the left margin of a source
line must have a matching shift-out character before the right margin
of the same line.

DBCS shift codes must be paired.

IBM3975I S Every shift-in character within a string generated for rescan
must have a matching shift-out character within that same string.

IBM3968I S CALL reference is undefined.

CALL reference must be a declared macro procedure.

DBCS shift codes must be paired.

IBM3976I S DBCS characters are allowed only in G and M constants.

IBM3969I S CALL reference is not a macro entry.

CALL reference must be a declared macro procedure.

IBM3970I S CALL reference must not be a function.

Hex strings (strings ending in one of the suffixes X, BX, B4, GX or XN),
bit strings, (strings ending in the suffix B), and character strings
not ending in the suffix M must contain only SBCS characters.

IBM3977I S SBCS characters are not allowed in G constants.

A CALL reference must not have the RETURNS attribute.

IBM3971I S CALL reference must not have the STATEMENT option.

Mixed SBCS and DBCS is allowed only in M constants.

IBM3978I S Invalid use of SBCS encoded as DBCS.

A CALL reference must not have the STATEMENT option.

IBM3972I S End-of-file has been encountered after an unmatched comment
marker.

An end-of-comment marker is probably missing.

Outside of comments, SBCS can be encoded as DBCS only as part of an
identifier.

IBM3979I S UX literal specifies an invalid UTF-8 string.

Not all hex strings represent valid UTF-8 strings. For more details
on valid UTF-8 strings, see the LRM and the text describing the UVALID
built-in function.

IBM3973I S End-of-file has been encountered after an unmatched quote.

IBM3980I S Recursion of procedures is not allowed.

A closing quote is probably missing.

A procedure must not invoke itself directly or indirectly.

IBM3981I S BUILTIN function may not be used outside a procedure.

    if a > 0 ; then

IBM3987I S Statement must start with a keyword or assignment target.

The named built-in function may be used only inside procedures.

IBM3982I S Procedure procedure-name is undefined and cannot be invoked.

A procedure must be defined (correctly) before it can be invoked.

IBM3983I S Premature end-of-source in scan.

After any condition prefixes and labels, statements must start with either
a keyword or, if the statement is an assignment statement, it must start
with an identifier or BIND reference. The flagged statement starts with
some other lexical element. This may indicate that a semicolon that is
meant for the previous statement is misplaced or that an element of this
statement has been erroneously omitted.

   a =0 b; = a;

The source ended during a scan when a right parenthesis or semicolon
was required.

    %a: proc() stmt returns( char );
      return( '1729' );
    %end; %dcl a entry;

    a /* and no more source follows */

IBM3988I S Statement has invalid syntax.

The flagged statement is not valid PL/I. This may indicate that a
semicolon that is meant for the previous statement is misplaced or that
an element of this statement has been erroneously omitted.

IBM3984I S File filename could not be opened.

   put skip garbage;

The named source file could not be opened. Make sure that the file is
named correctly, that it exists and that it is readable.

IBM3985I S Semicolon found before required closing right parenthesis.

A statement contained a semicolon before a right parenthesis which is
needed to match an earlier left parenthesis in the statement.

    select( a ; );

IBM3986I S IF statement syntax is invalid.

IBM3993I S Internal preprocessor error: assertion failed on line source
line in procedure name in package name

This message indicates that there is an error in the preprocessor. Report
the problem to IBM.

IBM3994I S Source is not valid UTF-8.

The source file contains lines that would be rejected by the UVALID
built-in function.

IBM3995I S Generated text contains invalid UTF-8.

A statement that appears to be an IF statement has invalid syntax.

The text produced by an ANSWER or RETURNS statement would be rejected
by the UVALID built-in function.

IBM3996I S Internal preprocessor error: protection exception in module
name.

IBM3998I S note

This message is used to report DB2 or CICS backend messages with a return
code of 16.

This message indicates that there is an error in the preprocessor. Report
the problem to IBM.

IBM3999I U note

IBM3997I S Internal preprocessor error: no WHEN clause satisfied within
module name.

This message indicates that there is an error in the preprocessor. Report
the problem to IBM.

This message is used by %NOTE statements with a return code of 16.

Chapter 6. Code Generation Messages (5000-5999)

IBM5001 INTERNAL COMPILER ERROR: text

An internal compiler error occurred during compilation.

Contact your Service Representative.

The compiler detected an error while writing to the specified file.

Ensure that the correct file is specified. If the file is located on a
LAN drive, ensure the LAN is working properly.

IBM5002 Virtual storage exceeded.

IBM5034 Read-only pointer initialization of dynamically allocated object
name is not valid.

The compiler ran out of memory trying to compile the file. This sometimes
happens with large files or programs with large functions. Note that
very large programs limit the amount of optimization that can be done.

Shut down any large processes that are running, ensure your swap path is
large enough, turn off optimization, and redefine your virtual storage to
a larger size. You can also divide the file into several small sections
or shorten the function.

IBM5003 text

General error message.

IBM5031 Unable to open file filename.

The compiler could not open the specified file.

Ensure the file name is correct. Ensure that the correct file is
specified. If the file is located on a LAN drive, ensure the LAN is
working properly. Also, the file may be locked by another process or
access may be denied because of insufficient permission.

IBM5032 An error occurred while reading file filename.

The compiler detected an error while reading from the specified file.

Ensure that the correct file is being read and has not been damaged. If
the file is located on a LAN drive, ensure the LAN is working properly.

IBM5033 An error occurred while writing to file filename.

The value of a read-only pointer must be known at compile time; a pointer
cannot be read-only and point to a dynamically allocated object at the
same time because the address of the pointee is known at run time only.

Modify the code so that the pointer is initialized with a read-only
value or make the pointer read-write.

IBM5051 Function function-name exceeds size limit.

The ACU for the function exceeds the LIMIT specified in the INLINE
suboption.

Increase LIMIT if feasible to do so.

IBM5052 Function function-name is (or grows) too large to be inlined.

A function is too large to be inlined into another function.

IBM5053 Some calls to function function- name cannot be inlined.

At least one call is either directly recursive, or the wrong number of
parameters were specified.

Check all calls to the function specified and make that number of
parameters match the function definition.

IBM5054 Automatic storage for function function-name increased to
over value.

183

The size of automatic storage for function increased by at least 4 KB
due to inlining.

An internal compiler error occurred during compilation.

Avoid inlining of functions which have large automatic storage.

Contact your Service Representative or compile with a different OPT level.

IBM5055 Parameter area overflow while compiling function-name.
Parameter area size exceeds the allowable limit of value.

IBM5104 Internal error while compiling function function-name text.
Compilation terminated.

The parameter area for a function resides in the first 4K of automatic
storage for that function. This message indicates that the parameter
area cannot fit into 4K.

Reduce the size of the parameter area by passing fewer parameters or by
passing the address of a large structure rather than the structure itself.

IBM5057 name section size cannot exceed 16777215 bytes. Total section
size is value bytes.

A Data or Code section cannot exceed 16M in size.

Partition input source files into multiple source files which can be
compiled separately.

An internal compiler error of high severity has occurred.

Contact your Service Representative. Be prepared to quote the text of
this message.

IBM5105 Constant table overflow compiling function function-name.
Compilation terminated.

The constant table is the table that stores all the integer and floating
point constants.

Reduce the number of constants in the program and recompile.

IBM5106 Instruction in function function- name on line value is too
complex.  Compilation terminated.

IBM5101 Maximum spill size of value is exceeded in function function-
name.

Spill size is the size of the spill area. Spill area is the storage
allocated if the number of machine registers is not sufficient for
program translation.

Reduce the complexity of the program and recompile.

IBM5102 Spill size for function function- name is not
sufficient. Recompile specifying option SPILL(n) where lower-limit <
n <= upper-limit.

Spill size is the size of the spill area. Spill area is the storage
allocated if the number of machine registers is not sufficient for
program translation.

Recompile using the SPILL(n) option lower-limit < n <= upper-limit or
with a different OPT level.

IBM5103 Internal error while compiling function function-nametext.

The specified instruction is too complex to be optimized.

Reduce the complexity of the instruction and recompile, or recompile
with a different OPT level.

IBM5107 Program too complex in function function-name.

The specified function is too complex to be optimized.

Reduce the complexity of the program and recompile, or recompile with
a different OPT level.

IBM5108 Expression too complex in function function-name. Some
optimizations not performed.

The specified expression is too complex to be optimized.

Reduce the complexity of the expression or compile with a different
OPT level.

IBM5114 Internal error while compiling function function-name text.

IBM5109 Infinite loop detected in function function-name. Program may
not stop.

A loop which may be infinite has been detected in the given function,
and your code may need to be changed. However, sometimes the compiler
will issue this message when your code is OK. For example, if the loop
is exited via a GOTO out of an ON-unit, the compiler may issue this
message although you would not need to change your code.

Recode the loop so that it will end.

IBM5110 Loop too complex in function function-name. Some optimizations
not performed.

The specified loop is too complex to be optimized.

No action is required.

IBM5111 Division by zero detected in function function-name. Runtime
exception may occur.

An internal compiler error of low severity has occurred.

Contact your Service Representative or compile with a different OPT level.

IBM5115 Control flow too complex in function function-name ; number of
basic blocks or edges exceeds value.

Basic blocks are segments of executable code without control flow. Edges
are the possible paths of control flow between basic blocks.

Reduce the complexity of the program and recompile.

IBM5116 Too many expressions in function function-name ; number of
symbolic registers exceeds value.

Symbolic registers are the internal representation of the results of
computations.

Reduce the complexity of the program and recompile.

IBM5117 A division by zero has been detected in the given function.

Recode the expression to eliminate the divide by zero.

IBM5112 Exponent is non-positive with zero as base in function
function-name.  Runtime exception may occur.

Too many expressions in function function-name; number of computation
table entries exceeds value.

The computation table contains all instructions generated in the
translation of a program.

Reduce the complexity of the program and recompile.

This is a possible floating-point divide by zero.

IBM5118 Recode the expression to eliminate the divide by zero.

Too many instructions in function function-name; number of procedure
list entries exceeds value.

IBM5113 Unsigned division by zero detected in function function-
name. Runtime exception may occur.

A division by zero has been detected in the given function.

Recode the expression to eliminate the divide by zero.

The procedure list is the list of all instructions generated by the
translation of each subprogram.

Reduce the complexity of the program and recompile.

IBM5119 Number of labels in function function-name exceeds value.

Labels are used whenever the execution path of the program could change;
for example: if statements, switch statements, loops or conditional
expressions.

Reduce the complexity of the program and recompile.

IBM5120 Too many symbols in function function-name ; number of dictionary
entries exceeds value.

Dictionary entries are used for variables, aggregate members, string
literals, pointer dereferences, function names and internal compiler
symbols.

Compile the program at a lower level of optimization or simplify the
program by reducing the number of variables or expressions.

IBM5121 Program is too complex in function function-name. Specify MAXMEM
option value greater than value.

Some optimizations not performed.

Recompile specifying option MAXMEM with the suggested value for additional
optimization.

IBM5122 Parameter area overflow while compiling name. Parameter area
size exceeds value.

The parameter area is used to pass parameters when calling functions. Its
size depends on the number of reference parameters, the number and size
of value parameters, and on the linkage used.

Reduce the size of the parameter area by passing fewer parameters or by
passing the address of a large structure rather than the structure itself.

IBM5123 Spill size for function function- name is exceeded. Recompile
specifying option SPILL(n) where lower-limit < n <= upper-limit for
faster spill code.

Spill size is the reserved size of the primary spill area. Spill area
is the storage allocated if the number of machine registers is not
sufficient for program translation.

Recompile using the SPILL(n) option with lower-limit < n <= upper-limit
for improved spill code generation.

IBM5130 An error occurred while opening file filename.

The compiler could not open the specified file.

Ensure the file name is correct. Ensure that the correct file is being
opened and has not been damaged. If the file is located on a LAN drive,
ensure the LAN is working properly. Also, the file may be locked
by another process or access may be denied because of insufficient
permission.

IBM5131 An error occurred while writing file filename.

The compiler could not read from the specified file.

Ensure the file name is correct. Ensure that the correct file is being
written to and has not been damaged.  If the file is located on a LAN
drive, ensure the LAN is working properly. Also, the file may be locked
by another process or access may be denied because of insufficient
permission.

IBM5132 An error occurred while closing file filename.

The compiler could not write to the specified file.

Ensure the file name is correct. Ensure that the correct file is being
closed and has not been damaged. If the file is located on a LAN drive,
ensure the LAN is working properly. Also, the file may be locked
by another process or access may be denied because of insufficient
permission.

IBM5141 Automatic area for function-name is too large

Automatic data resides in the stack; the stack size is limited by the
target machine addressabilty.

Avoid large structures and large arrays as local variables; try using
dynamically allocated data.  Alternatively, try to break down the
procedure into several smaller procedures.
