Appendix B. Features New to This Revision

B.1 Lexical Constructs

1. Lowercase characters

Lowercase characters are permitted in the language character set, in
keywords, in picture specifications, in format items, in constants, in
input data, in declared names, and in all other alphanumeric constructs.
In declared names, the correspondence of lowercase characters and
uppercase characters is That is, programs intended for interchange
must not depend upon whether an implementation considers lowercase and
uppercase characters as distinct in declared names.

In stream output of bit and numeric values, and in conversion of numeric values to character strings,
lowercase characters are not generated.

2. Blank after P not required

P’string’ is a legal picture constant. (Previously, only P 'string’ was permitted.)

3. Oversized floating-point literals

Floating-point literals are permitted, in program text and stream
input, which exceed the capability of the implementation to represent
them. Insignificant digits in excessof the implementation’s
representational capability are ignored.

B.2 Attributes and Declarations

1. The asterisk INITIAL iteration factor

Asterisk in the INITIAL iteration factor means “initialize the entire
aggregateto one (specified) scalar value”.

2. The RESERVED attribute

RESERVED implies STATIC EXTERNAL, but can never cause storage to be
allocated or initialized.  Declaring a name with the RESERVED attribute
implies that the PL/I program must contain at least one declaration of
the same name with STATIC EXTERNAL and without RESERVED.

3. The UNION attribute

The UNION attribute is used to declare a set of MEMBERS, of which it is
only valid to accessthe MEMBER which last had a value assignedto it. This
standard thus permits (but does not require) the MEMBERS of a UNION to
be allocated to overlapping storage.

4. Named computational constants

The DEFINE CONSTANT statement provides for definition of constant
identifiers (named computational constants), and permits use of such named
constants in lexically subsequent declarations and expressions within the
defining package, procedure, or block.  DEFINE CONSTANT statements must
appear before any other statements in the containing package, procedure,
or block, and the definition of a named computation constant must
lexically precede any uses in the defining package, procedure, or block.

5. Extend EXTERNAL attribute

An optional (‘string’) may be associatedwith the EXTERNAL attribute,
e.g.  DECLARE GKS-OPEN-WORKSTATION ENTRY EXTERNAL ('GKS002'); The effect
of this feature is to define, in an implementation defined fashion,
the environment name (GKS002 in this case) to be used for the declared
object, and the PL/I language name (GKS OPEN WORKSTATION in this case)
to be used within the declaring package, procedure, or block.

6. EXTERNAL on PROCEDURE statements and ENTRY declarations

The EXTERNAL attribute may be applied to PROCEDURE statements and ENTRY
declarations, so that they can have implementation defined environment names.

B.3 Program Structure and Control

1. The NONRECURSIVE keyword

The NONRECURSIVE keyword is an assertion that a procedure is
not recursive. (This is symmetric with the RECURSIVE keyword, and
although NONRECURSIVE is the default if RECURSIVE is not specified, the
NONRECURSIVE keyword permits explicit documentation of the properties
of nonrecursive procedures.

2. SELECT groups

SELECT groups, containing WHEN and OTHERWISE clauses,provide case-driven
selection of executable code units.

3. DO LOOP

DO LOOP specifies indefinite iteration.

4. The LEAVE statement

The LEAVE statement permits exit from the immediately containing DO group,
or a specific labelled DO group.

5. The UNTIL clause

The UNTIL clause provides for repetitive execution of a group until a
condition is satisfied. The’condition is tested after each execution
of the group.

6. Packages

Packages may be constructed, using the PACKAGE and END statements.
A package is a block which may immediately contain only declarations
and procedures. The package forms a name scope which is shared by
all declarations and procedures contained in the package. By use of
the EXPORTS option on the PACKAGE statement, procedures immediately
contained in the package can be made visible outside of the name scope
formed by the package. Packagesthus permit multiple, externally visible
procedures to execute within and share the declarative context formed
by the package.  Condition prefixes specified on a PACKAGE statement
apply to all procedures contained in the package (unless overridden).

A package must only be declared at the top level of a program. That is,
a package cannot be contained in any other package or procedure. The
declarations immediately contained in a package must consist only of
constants, and BASED and STATIC variables; AUTOMATIC and DEFINED variables
must not be immediately contained in a package, and a package cannot have
parameters.  Only top level procedures (procedures immediately contained
in a package) can be exported from a package, and any procedures not
explicitly exported are local to the package. All top level procedures
contained in a package can be exported by use of the EXPORTS(*) construct.

B.5 Input/Output

1. L format item

L format, used in GET EDIT and PUT EDIT format lists, inputs the rest
of the current line and skips past the linemark, or outputs a string
followed by a linemark.
2. SIZETO option for varying length records

The SIZETO option may be used with the READ statement to determine the
actual length of the transmitted record.

3.  The BEGINPAGE condition

See “Conditions and Exception Handling”, below.

4.  WRITE to KEYED SEQUENTIAL UPDATE file

WRITE is allowed to files opened for KEYED SEQUENTIAL UPDATE.

B.6 Expressions ahn Evaluation

1. Short-circuit “and/or” operators

Short-circuit “and” and “or” operators (spelled &: and |:) provide
boolean expressions in which the right operand must not be evaluated if
the value of the left operand is sufficient to determine the value of
the expression. This permits explicit control of the order in which the
operands are evaluated, overriding the usual rule that permits operands
to be evaluated in either order.

2. Exclusive-or operator

The exclusive-or operator is binary not.

3. Restricted Expressions

“Restricted expressions are a subset of PL/I language expressions,
designed to be evaluated at translation time, and allowed in DECLARE and
DEFINE CONSTANT statements for the purpose of defining named computational
constants and in declaration of extents of STATIC variables, parameters,
and returns descriptors, as well as INITIAL attributes of STATIC
variables. (In the specification of precision and scale in declarations
and built-in functions, only a limited form of restricted expressions --
namely, a literal or a reference to a named constant -- is permitted.)

The form of allowable restricted expressions has been extended to be very
general. All operators, all enquiry functions except DECLARESIZE, and all
built-in functions except DATE, TIME, DATETIME, ONCODE, ONFILE, ONKEY,
and ONSOURCE are allowed in restricted expressions. String constants,
numeric constants, and named constants may all be operands.

B.7 Pictures

1. Generalized picture insertion/float

This feature provides generalized specification of insertion and
floating characters in pictures. If a picture specification includes
(in a manner valid with respect to the syntax of pictures) the quoted
characters “<” and “>“, then the characters between “<”
and “>” will be inserted at that point in the picture value.
Additional “>” characters following the “>” specify a floating
field, and the characters between “<” and “>” will float right
to the left of the most significant digit position.  One expected use
of this capability is support of international currency symbols.

2. Parentheses in pictures

This feature permits a PICTURE pattern to begin with an arbitrary number
of left parentheses and to end with a single right parenthesis. The left
parentheses are floating characters. If the picture value is negative,
it is represented enclosed by a single left and right parenthesispair.
This provides a straightforward way to parenthesize negative values
on output.

3. EDIT built-in function

See “Built-in Functions and Pseudo-variables" below.

B.8 Built-in Functions and Pseudo-variables

1. TRIM built-in function

TRIM removes a sequence of characters, belonging to a programmer-specified
set, from the beginning and/or end of a string.

2. SEARCH built-in function

SEARCH returns the location in a target string of the first occurrence
of any character contained by a search string. See also item 14, below.

3. CURRENTSIZE built-in function

CURRENTSIZE returns the amount of storage, in IMPLEMENTATION-DEFINED
units, that a generation of storage associated with a variable occupies.

4. EXPONENT built-in function and pseudo-variable

The EXPONENT built-in function and pseudo-variable permit floating-point
data to be scaled efficiently and without loss of accuracy, by providing
access to and manipulation of the exponent field of floating-point
values. This built-in function and pseudo-variable provide the effect
of multiplication and division, by a power of the implementation radix,
without the loss of low-order significant digits that an actual multiply
or divide operation may cause.

The effect of EXPONENT is implementation-dependent, and does not require
knowledge of exponent bias or representation of zero to correctly utilize.

5. FILEOPEN built-in function

FILEOPEN takes a file value and returns a boolean value indicating
whether or not the file is open.

6. ISOCHAR built-in function

ISOCHAR provides a standard way to accesscontrol characters and other
special characters independent of the external character’set(s) of
an implementation.

The arguments to ISOCHAR specify the row and column positions, in
the IS0 character tables, which identify a specific character and its
associated semantics. Implementations will translate those semantics to
the appropriate, corresponding character(s) for that implementation.

7. MAXLENGTH built-in function

MAXLENGTH takes a varying string and returns the maximum declared length
of the varying string (in contrast to LENGTH, which returns the current
length).

8. TALLY built-in function

TALLY takes two bit or character string arguments, and returns the number
of occurrences of the second argument in the first argument.

9. DATETIME built-in function

DATETIME returns the date and time in an extended format that will
continue to work correctly after December 31, 1999.

10. EDIT built-in function

EDIT takes a numeric or string first argument and a character string
second argument; the second argument must be a valid picture pattern. The
first argument is converted to a character string according to the
picture represented by the second argument. This conversion yields
the same character string that would result from assigning the first
argument to a picture variable declared with the picture specified by
the second argument.

11. IDENTICAL built-in function

IDENTICAL allows comparison of arbitrary objects. If two objects have
identical data descriptions, then if they have identical values, then
IDENTICAL returns boolean true, otherwise it returns false. When comparing
the values of two aggregates,any fill occupying storage between members
of each aggregateare ignored.

12. Permit UNSPEC with aggregateargument

UNSPEC accepts an array, structure, or union argument,

13. HBOUND/LBOUND/DlMENSION built-in function defaults

If the second argument, the dimension, is not supplied to HBOUND, LBOUND,
or DIMENSION, it defaults to 1.

14. Extend INDEX/VERIFY/SEARCH built-in functions

INDEX, VERIFY, and SEARCH take an optional third argument: the location
within the argument string at which to begin processing.

B.9 Enquiries

A new class of functions, denoted as “Enquiries”, has been
defined.  These functions are distinguished from built-in functions
by their syntax (which utilizes “(:” and “:)“, for example
“DECLARESIZE(:XYZ:)“) and by their arguments (which may be keywords
or names without values, whereas the built-in functions require values
for arguments.)  A special subclass of these functions is denoted as the
“Arithmetic Enquiries”. These functions provide information regarding
the floating-point environment and model-numbers of an implementation.

1. DECLARESIZE enquiry

The DECLARESIZE enquiry function returns the amount of storage, in
IMPLEMENTATION-DEFINED units, that a BASED variable would occupy if it
were allocated when DECLARESIZE is invoked. Use of DECLARESIZE does not
require that there actually be a generation of storage associated with
the referenced variable when DECLARESIZE is invoked.

2. NULL enquiry

NULL takes one argument, which must be one of the keywords POINTER,
OFFSET, ENTRY, LABEL, or FILE, and returns a null value of the appropriate
type.

3. EPSILON arithmetic enquiry

EPSILON returns the interval separating successivevalues representable
by a floating-point data type given as its argument.

4. MAXVAL arithmetic enquiry

MAXVAL
returns the maximum value representable by a floating-point data type
given as its argument.

5. MTNVAL arithmetic enquiry

MINVAL returns the minimum value representable by a floating-point data
type given as its argument.

6. RADIX arithmetic enquiry

RADIX returns the actual implementation base corresponding to a
floating-point data type given as its argument.

B.10 Conditions and Exception Handling

BEGINPAGE condition

BEGINPAGE is signalled at the beginning of every page of a PRINT file.

