Appendix F. Rationale for Major Design Decisions

There are many costs attendant upon each feature included in this standard: costs to design, document, learn,
remember, compile, execute, and maintain the feature. These costs were weighed against the liabilities of not
including the feature: popularity of usage, difficulty of progr annning with alternative constructs, inefficiency of
alternative constructs, and loss of readability due to the use of alternative constructs.

The content of this standard derives from American National Standard Programming Language PL/I (ANSI
X3.53-1976), especially those portions included in ANSI X3.74-1981, and a series of proposals and
suggestionsfor “new” language features. “New”, in this case, refers to any feature not specified in ANSI
X3.53-1976.

Of the features of ANSI X3.53-1976, some were easy to exclude becausethey were common sourcesof
programming errors, or becausethe cost to implement or use them was high in relation to their utility. Other
features were more difficult to evaluate, particularly those whose cost and utility were high.
Many entirely new features (relative to ANSI X3.53-1976) were considered for inclusion in this standard. A
large fraction of them were proposed, at least informally, during the final review before adoption of ANSI
X3.53-1976 and deferred to see how, or if, they would be implemented and used.

Proposals were viewed favorably if they met one or more of the following criteria:
1. The functionality had already been incorporated into existing implementations and had been found to be
useful and successful.

2. Similar functionality was provided in several existing implementations using different mechanismsand
agreement could be reached that the functionality was important and that a single mechanism was, after
experience, most appropriate.

3. There was clear user demand for the proposed modifications and they were obvious and compatible
extensions to well-established facilities.

By contrast, the following criteria caused a proposal to be looked on with disfavor:

1. The proposal would have introduced a new incompatibility, either with ANSI X3.53-1976 or with ANSI
X3.74-l 98 1, or with important non-conforming implementations of PL/I. It was an important goal that
the revised standard specify a language that, insofar as possible, would permit programs written in it to be
portable among all sensible implementations of PL/I.

2. The proposal would have introduced an alternate mechanism for performing some function where the
functionality already existed in the language or would have introduced little new functionality at high
implementation cost or with a very high degree of complexity.

3. The proposed feature could not have been adequately described in implementation independent ways
without unreasonably constraining hardware, software, or operating systems.

4. The proposal represented a very large change or a change that would alter the basic character of PL/I into
that of another language.

5. The proposed feature would have been completely new to PL/I and would have represented
standardization prior to any implementation experience.

Several proposals, of course, met both positive and negative criteriaand, in these cases,the committee weighed
both sets of factors in its decisions, paying special attention to existing practice.
The major decisions to exclude features of ANSI X3.53-1976 made during the development of this standard
and the rationale for each decision are discussedhere so that the reader will have some understanding of why
various features were included in, or excluded from, this standard.

1. Because the number of distinct data types in a language has a multiplicative effect on the number of code
patterns and library routines needed to support execution of programs, the number of distinct scalar data
types is limited to approximately one half of those provided by ANSI X3.53-1976, by excluding little-used
data types. Over half of the excluded data types are forms of COMPLEX data and little-used forms of
PICTURE data.

2. Although array-valued expressionswere recognized to be of high utility in scientific applications, their cost
was considered to be excessive for inclusion in this standard. Structure-valued expressionsand
mixed-aggregate-type expressions were considered to be much less useful than were array-valued
expressions. These expressionshave also been found to cause difficulties in program interchange.

3. Data-directed stream I/O is excluded in order to reduce the amount of execution-time code required to
support this standard. This restriction also simplify compilers and consequently reduce the cost to
implement and use them.

4. DEFAULT, ENTRY, and LOCATE statements were excluded because their frequency of usage did not
justify their cost either in terms of compiler complexity or additional language complexity. The
DEFAULT statement has also been found to inhibit, rather than enhance, program clarity and interchange.
The addition of the PACKAGE construction to the languagefurther reduces the requirement for
ENTRY.

5. Explicit declaration of all user-defined names either by means of a DECLARE statement or by means of a
label prefix is required in order to reduce programming errors and to improve the readability of programs.
This requirement also reduces the complexity of compilers.

6. Implicit conversion from one data type to another is limited to those contexts in which such conversions are
likely to produce the desired result. This limitation eliminates a very common source of programming
errors.

7. The conditions that can be explicitly designated in this standard are limited. This reduces implementation
complexity while retaining most of the power of the exception handling provided by ANSI X3.53-1976.

8. The DO statement was designed to make it easy to learn and easy to use without introducing programming
errors.

9. All storage classesexcept CONTROLLED are included, and variable extents are permitted where
permitted by ANSI X3.53-1976. CONTROLLED is excluded becauseit is largely redundant with
BASED. Variable extents are permitted becauseno other languagefeature provides a suitable alternative.

10. REFER options are included in a single, simplified form. While REFER is needed for some important
programming applications, its full generality implies implementation cost and user confusion that outweighs
the advantage of that generality.

11. The DEFINED attribute is included for simple and string overlay defining. For simple defining, all extents
are required to match. POSITION, iSUE&, and *-subscripts in the reference to the base variable are
excluded becauseof excessivecomplexity for both users and implementers.
